孤鸿海上来，	A lonely swan from the sea flies,
池潢不敢顾；	To alight on puddles it does not deign.
侧见双翠鸟，	Nesting in the poplar of pearls
巢在三珠树。	It spies and questions green birds twain:
矫矫珍木巅，	"Don't you fear the threat of slings,
得无金丸惧？	Perched on top of branches so high?
美服患人指，	Nice clothes invite pointing fingers,
高明逼神恶。	High climbers god's good will defy.
今我游冥冥，	Bird-hunters will crave me in vain,
弋者何所慕？	For I roam the limitless sky."
兰叶春葳蕤，	Tender orchid-leaves in spring
桂华秋皎洁；	And cinnamon-blossoms bright in autumn
欣欣此生意，	Are as self-contained as life is,
自尔为佳节。	Which conforms them to the seasons.
谁知林栖者？	Yet why will you think that a forest-hermit,
闻风坐相悦，	Allured by sweet winds and contented with beauty,
草木有本心，	Would no more ask to-be transplanted
何求美人折？	Than Would any other natural flower?
幽人归独卧，	The hermit in his lone abode
滞虑洗孤清，	Nurses his thoughts cleansed of care,
持此谢高鸟，	Them he projects to the wild goose
因之传远情。	For it to his distant Sovereign to bear.
日夕怀空意，	Who will be moved by the sincerity
人谁感至精？	Of my vain day-and-night prayer?
飞沈理自隔，	What comfort is for my loyalty
何所慰吾诚？	When fliers and sinkers can compare?
江南有丹橘，	Here, south of the Yangzi, grows a red orange tree.
经冬犹绿林；	All winter long its leaves are green,
岂伊地气暖？	Not because of a warmer soil,
自有岁寒心。	But because its' nature is used to the cold.
可以荐嘉客，	Though it might serve your honorable guests,
奈何阻重深？	You leave it here, far below mountain and river.
运命惟所遇，	Circumstance governs destiny.
循环不可寻。	Cause and effect are an infinite cycle.
徒言树桃李，	You plant your peach-trees and your plums,
此木岂无阴？	You forget the shade from this other tree.
暮从碧山下，	Down the blue mountain in the evening,
山月随人归；	Moonlight was my homeward escort.
却顾所来径，	Looking back, I saw my path
苍苍横翠微。	Lie in levels of deep shadow.
相携及田家，	I was passing the farm-house of a friend,
童稚开荆扉；	When his children called from a gate of thorn
绿竹入幽径，	And led me twining through jade bamboos
青萝拂行衣。	Where green vines caught and held my clothes.
欢言得所憩，	And I was glad of a chance to rest
美酒聊共挥；	And glad of a chance to drink with my friend.
长歌吟松风，	We sang to the tune of the wind in the pines;
曲尽河星稀。	And we finished our songs as the stars went down,
我醉君复乐，	When, I being drunk and my friend more than happy,
陶然共忘机。	Between us we forgot the world.
花间一壶酒，	From a pot of wine among the flowers
独酌无相亲；	I drank alone. There was no one with me
举杯邀明月，	Till, raising my cup, I asked the bright moon
对影成三人。	To bring me my shadow and make us three.
月既不解饮，	Alas, the moon was unable to drink
影徒随我身；	And my shadow tagged me vacantly;
暂伴月将影，	But still for a while I had these friends
行乐须及春。	To cheer me through the end of spring.
我歌月徘徊，	I sang. The moon encouraged me.
我舞影零乱；	I danced. My shadow tumbled after.
醒时同交欢，	As long as I knew, we were boon companions.
醉后各分散。	And then I was drunk, and we lost one another.
永结无情游，	Shall goodwill ever be secure?
相期邈云汉。	I watch the long road of the River of Stars.
燕草如碧丝，	Your grasses up north are as blue as jade,
秦桑低绿枝；	Our mulberries here curve green-threaded branches;
当君怀归日，	And at last you think of returning home,
是妾断肠时。	Now when my heart is almost broken.
春风不相识，	O breeze of the spring, since I dare not know you,
何事入罗帏？	Why part the silk curtains by my bed?
岱宗夫如何？	What shall I say of the Great Peak?
齐鲁青未了。	The ancient dukedoms are everywhere green,
造化钟神秀，	Inspired and stirred by the breath of creation,
阴阳割昏晓。	With the Twin Forces balancing day and night.
荡胸生层云，	I bare my breast toward opening clouds,
决眥入归鸟。	I strain my sight after birds flying home.
会当凌绝顶，	When shall I reach the top and hold
一览众山小。	All mountains in a single glance?
人生不相见，	It is almost as hard for friends to meet
动如参与商，	As for the morning and evening stars.
今夕复何夕？	Tonight then is a rare event,
共此灯烛光。	Joining, in the candlelight,
少壮能几时？	Two men who were young not long ago
鬓发各已苍。	But now are turning grey at the temples.
访旧半为鬼，	To find that half our friends are dead
惊呼热中肠。	Shocks us, burns our hearts with grief.
焉知二十载，	We little guessed it would be twenty years
重上君子堂。	Before I could visit you again.
昔别君未婚，	When I went away, you were still unmarried;
儿女忽成行；	But now these boys and girls in a row
怡然敬父执，	Are very kind to their father's old friend.
问我来何方。	They ask me where I have been on my journey;
问答乃未已，	And then, when we have talked awhile,
驱儿罗酒浆。	They bring and show me wines and dishes,
夜雨剪春韭，	Spring chives cut in the night-rain
新炊间黄粱。	And brown rice cooked freshly a special way.
主称会面难，	My host proclaims it a festival,
一举累十觞；	He urges me to drink ten cups
十觞亦不醉，	But what ten cups could make me as drunk
感子故意长。	As I always am with your love in my heart?
明日隔山岳，	Tomorrow the mountains will separate us;
世事两茫茫。	After tomorrow-who can say?
绝代有佳人，	Who is lovelier than she?
幽居在空谷；	Yet she lives alone in an empty valley.
自云良家子，	She tells me she came from a good family
零落依草木。	Which is humbled now into the dust.
关中昔丧乱，	When trouble arose in the Kuan district,
兄弟遭杀戮；	Her brothers and close kin were killed.
官高何足论？	What use were their high offices,
不得收骨肉。	Not even shielding their own lives?
世情恶衰歇，	The world has but scorn for adversity;
万事随转烛。	Hope goes out, like the light of a candle.
夫婿轻薄儿，	Her husband, with a vagrant heart,
新人美如玉。	Seeks a new face like a new piece of jade;
合昏尚知时，	And when morning-glories furl at night
鸳鸯不独宿；	And mandarin-ducks lie side by side,
但见新人笑，	All he can see is the smile of the new love,
那闻旧人哭？	While the old love weeps unheard.
在山泉水清，	The brook was pure in its mountain source,
出山泉水浊。	But away from the mountain its waters darken.
侍婢卖珠回，	Waiting for her maid to come from selling pearls
牵萝补茅屋。	For straw to cover the roof again,
摘花不插发，	She picks a few flowers, no longer for her hair,
采柏动盈掬。	And lets pine-needles fall through her fingers,
天寒翠袖薄，	And, forgetting her thin silk sleeve and the cold,
日暮倚修竹。	She leans in the sunset by a tall bamboo.
死别已吞声，	There are sobs when death is the cause of parting;
生别常恻恻。	But life has its partings again and again.
江南瘴疠地，	From the poisonous damps of the southern river
逐客无消息。	You had sent me not one sign from your exile
故人入我梦，	Till you came to me last night in a dream,
明我长相忆；	Because I am always thinking of you.
君今在罗网，	I wondered if it were really you,
何以有羽翼？	Venturing so long a journey.
恐非平生魂，	You came to me through the green of a forest,
路远不可测。	You disappeared by a shadowy fortress.
魂来枫林青，	Yet out of the midmost mesh of your snare,
魂返关塞黑；	How could you lift your wings and use them?
落月满屋梁，	I woke, and the low moon's glimmer on a rafter
犹疑照颜色。	Seemed to be your face, still floating in the air.
水深波浪阔，	There were waters to cross, they were wild and tossing;
无使蛟龙得。	If you fell, there were dragons and river monsters.
浮云终日行，	This cloud, that has drifted all day through the sky,
游子久不至；	May, like a wanderer, never come back.
三夜频梦君，	Three nights now I have dreamed of you
情亲见君意。	As tender, intimate and real as though I were awake.
告归常局促，	And then, abruptly rising to go,
苦道来不易。	You told me the perils of adventure
江湖多风波，	By river and lake-the storms, the wrecks,
舟楫恐失坠。	The fears that are borne on a little boat;
出门搔白首，	And, here in my doorway, you rubbed your white head
若负平生志。	As if there were something puzzling you.
冠盖满京华，	Our capital teems with officious people,
斯人独憔悴。	While you are alone and helpless and poor.
孰云网恢恢？	Who says that the heavenly net never fails?
将老身反累！	It has brought you ill fortune, old as you are.
千秋万岁名，	A thousand years' fame, ten thousand years' fame
寂寞身后事。	What good, when you are dead and gone.
下马饮君酒，	I dismount from my horse and I offer you wine,
问君何所之？	And I ask you where you are going and why.
君言不得意，	And you answer: "I am discontent
归卧南山陲。	And would rest at the foot of the southern mountain.
但去莫复闻，	So give me leave and ask me no questions.
白云无尽时。	White clouds pass there without end."
圣代无隐者，	In a happy reign there should be no hermits;
英灵尽来归，	The wise and able should consult together.
遂令东山客，	So you, a man of the eastern mountains,
不得顾采薇。	Gave up your life of picking herbs
既至金门远，	And came all the way to the Gate of Gold
孰云吾道非？	But you found your devotion unavailing.
江淮度寒食，	To spend the Day of No Fire on one of the southern rivers,
京洛缝春衣。	You have mended your spring clothes here in these northern cities.
置酒长安道，	I pour you the farewell wine as you set out from the capital
同心与我违；	Soon I shall be left behind here by my bosom-friend.
行当浮桂棹，	In your sail-boat of sweet cinnamon-wood
未几拂荆扉。	You will float again toward your own thatch door,
远树带行客，	Led along by distant trees
孤城当落晖。	To a sunset shining on a far-away town.
吾谋适不用，	What though your purpose happened to fail,
勿谓知音稀？	Doubt not that some of us can hear high music.
言入黄花川，	I have sailed the River of Yellow Flowers,
每逐青溪水；	Borne by the channel of a green stream,
随山将万转，	Rounding ten thousand turns through the mountains
趣途无百里。	On a journey of less than thirty miles.
声喧乱石中，	Rapids hum over heaped rocks;
色静深松里；	But where light grows dim in the thick pines,
漾漾泛菱荇，	The surface of an inlet sways with nut-horns
澄澄映葭苇。	And weeds are lush along the banks.
我心素已闲，	Down in my heart I have always been as pure
清川澹如此。	As this limpid water is.
请留盘石上，	Oh, to remain on a broad flat rock
垂钓将已矣！	And to cast a fishing-line forever!
斜光照墟落，	In the slant of the sun on the country-side,
穷巷牛羊归。	Cattle and sheep trail home along the lane;
野老念牧童，	And a rugged old man in a thatch door
倚杖候荆扉。	Leans on a staff and thinks of his son, the herdboy.
雉雊麦苗秀，	There are whirring pheasants? full wheat-ears,
蚕眠桑叶稀。	Silk-worms asleep, pared mulberry-leaves.
田夫荷锄立，	And the farmers, returning with hoes on their shoulders,
相见语依依。	Hail one another familiarly.
即此羡闲逸，	No wonder I long for the simple life
怅然吟式微。	And am sighing the old song, Oh, to go Back Again!
艳色天下重，	Since beauty is honored all over the Empire,
西施宁久微？	How could Xi Shi remain humbly at home?
朝为越溪女，	Washing clothes at dawn by a southern lake
暮作吴宫妃。	And that evening a great lady in a palace of the north:
贱日岂殊众？	Lowly one day, no different from the others,
贵来方悟稀。	The next day exalted, everyone praising her.
邀人傅脂粉，	No more would her own hands powder her face
不自著罗衣，	Or arrange on her shoulders a silken robe.
君宠益娇态，	And the more the King loved her, the lovelier she looked,
君怜无是非。	Blinding him away from wisdom.
当时浣纱伴，	Girls who had once washed silk beside her
莫得同车归。	Were kept at a distance from her chariot.
持谢邻家子，	And none of the girls in her neighbors' houses
效颦安可希？	By pursing their brows could copy her beauty.
北山白云里，	On a northern peak among white clouds
隐者自怡悦；	You have found your hermitage of peace;
相望始登高，	And now, as I climb this mountain to see you,
心随雁飞灭。	High with the wild-geese flies my heart.
愁因薄暮起，	The quiet dusk might seem a little sad
兴是清秋发。	If this autumn weather were not so brisk and clear;
时见归村人，	I look down at the river bank, with homeward-bound villagers
沙行渡头歇。	Resting on the sand till the ferry returns;
天边树若荠，	There are trees at the horizon like a row of grasses
江畔洲如月。	And against the river's rim an island like the moon
何当载酒来，	I hope that you will come and meet me, bringing a basket of wine
共醉重阳节。	And we'll celebrate together the Mountain Holiday.
山光忽西落，	The mountain-light suddenly fails in the west,
池月渐东上。	In the east from the lake the slow moon rises.
散发乘夜凉，	I loosen my hair to enjoy the evening coolness
开轩卧闲敞。	And open my window and lie down in peace.
荷风送香气，	The wind brings me odors of lotuses,
竹露滴清响。	And bamboo-leaves drip with a music of dew.
欲取鸣琴弹，	I would take up my lute and I would play,
恨无知音赏。	But, alas, who here would understand?
感此怀故人，	And so I think of you, old friend,
中宵劳梦想。	O troubler of my midnight dreams !
夕阳度西岭，	Now that the sun has set beyond the western range,
群壑倏已暝；	Valley after valley is shadowy and dim.
松月生夜凉，	And now through pine-trees come the moon and the chill of evening,
风泉满清听。	And my ears feel pure with the sound of wind and water
樵人归欲尽，	Nearly all the woodsmen have reached home,
烟鸟栖初定。	Birds have settled on their perches in the quiet mist.
之子期宿来，	And still -- because you promised -- I am waiting for you, waiting,
孤琴候萝径。	Playing lute under a wayside vine.
高卧南斋时，	Lying on a high seat in the south study,
开帷月初吐；	We have lifted the curtain-and we see the rising moon
清辉淡水木，	Brighten with pure light the water and the grove
演漾在窗户。	And flow like a wave on our window and our door.
苒苒几盈虚？	It will move through the cycle, full moon and then crescent again,
澄澄变今古。	Calmly, beyond our wisdom, altering new to old.
美人清江畔，	Our chosen one, our friend, is now by a limpid river --
是夜越吟苦。	Singing, perhaps, a plaintive eastern song.
千里其如何？	He is far, far away from us, three hundred miles away.
微风吹兰杜。	And yet a breath of orchids comes along the wind.
绝顶一茅茨，	To your hermitage here on the top of the mountain
直上三十里；	I have climbed, without stopping, these ten miles.
扣关无僮仆，	I have knocked at your door, and no one answered;
窥室惟案几。	I have peeped into your room, at your seat beside the table.
若非巾柴车？	Perhaps you are out riding in your canopied chair,
应是钓秋水。	Or fishing, more likely, in some autumn pool.
差池不相见，	Sorry though I am to be missing you,
黾勉空仰止。	You have become my meditation
草色新雨中，	The beauty of your grasses, fresh with rain,
松声晚窗里；	And close beside your window the music of your pines.
及兹契幽绝，	I take into my being all that I see and hear,
自足荡心耳。	Soothing my senses, quieting my heart;
虽无宾主意，	And though there be neither host nor guest,
颇得清净理。	Have I not reasoned a visit complete?
兴尽方下山，	After enough, I have gone down the mountain.
何必待之子。	Why should I wait for you any longer?
幽意无断绝，	Thoughtful elation has no end:
此去随所偶；	Onward I bear it to whatever come.
晚风吹行舟，	And my boat and I, before the evening breeze
花路入溪口。	Passing flowers, entering the lake,
际夜转西壑，	Turn at nightfall toward the western valley,
隔山望南斗。	Where I watch the south star over the mountain
潭烟飞溶溶，	And a mist that rises, hovering soft,
林月低向后。	And the low moon slanting through the trees;
生事且弥漫，	And I choose to put away from me every worldly matter
愿为持竿叟。	And only to be an old man with a fishing-pole.
清溪深不测，	Here, beside a clear deep lake,
隐处唯孤云；	You live accompanied by clouds;
松际露微月，	Or soft through the pine the moon arrives
清光犹为君。	To be your own pure-hearted friend.
茅亭宿花影，	You rest under thatch in the shadow of your flowers,
药院滋苔纹。	Your dewy herbs flourish in their bed of moss.
余亦谢时去，	Let me leave the world. Let me alight, like you,
西山鸾鹤群。	On your western mountain with phoenixes and cranes.
塔势如涌出，	The pagoda, rising abruptly from earth,
孤高耸天宫；	Reaches to the very Palace of Heaven.
登临出世界，	Climbing, we seem to have left the world behind us,
磴道盘虚空。	With the steps we look down on hung from space.
突兀压神州，	It overtops a holy land
峥嵘如鬼工；	And can only have been built by toil of the spirit.
四角碍白日，	Its four sides darken the bright sun,
七层摩苍穹。	Its seven stories cut the grey clouds;
下窥指高鸟，	Birds fly down beyond our sight,
俯听闻惊风。	And the rapid wind below our hearing;
连山若波涛，	Mountain-ranges, toward the east,
奔凑如朝东。	Appear to be curving and flowing like rivers;
青槐夹驰道，	Far green locust-trees line broad roads
宫馆何玲珑？	Toward clustered palaces and mansions;
秋色从西来，	Colors of autumn, out of the west,
苍然满关中。	Enter advancing through the city;
五陵北原上，	And northward there lie, in five graveyards,
万古青蒙蒙。	Calm forever under dewy green grass,
净理了可悟，	Those who know life's final meaning
胜因夙所宗。	Which all humankind must learn.
誓将挂冠去，	Henceforth I put my official hat aside.
觉道资无穷。	To find the Eternal Way is the only happiness.
昔岁逢太平，	I still remember those days of peace
山林二十年。	Twenty years among mountains and forests,
泉源在庭户，	The pure stream running past my yard,
洞壑当门前。	The caves and valleys at my door.
井税有常期，	Taxes were light and regular then,
日晏犹得眠。	And I could sleep soundly and late in the morning-
忽然遭时变，	Till suddenly came a sorry change.
数岁亲戎旃。	For years now I have been serving in the army.
今来典斯郡，	When I began here as an official,
山夷又纷然。	The mountain bandits were rising again;
城小贼不屠，	But the town was so small it was spared by the thieves,
人贫伤可怜。	And the people so poor and so pitiable
是以陷邻境，	That all other districts were looted
此州独见全。	And this one this time let alone.
使臣将王命，	Do you imperial commissioners
岂不如贼焉？	Mean to be less kind than bandits?
令彼徵敛者，	The people you force to pay the poll
迫之如火煎。	Are like creatures frying over a fire.
谁能绝人命？	And how can you sacrifice human lives,
以作时世贤。	Just to be known as able collectors?
思欲委符节，	Oh, let me fling down my official seal,
引竿自刺船，	Let me be a lone fisherman in a small boat
将家就鱼麦，	And support my family on fish and wheat
归老江湖边。	And content my old age with rivers and lakes!
兵卫森画戟，	Outside are insignia, shown in state;
宴寝凝清香。	But here are sweet incense-clouds, quietly ours.
海上风雨至，	Wind and rain, coming in from sea,
逍遥池阁凉。	Have cooled this pavilion above the lake
烦痾近消散，	And driven the feverish heat away
嘉宾复满堂。	From where my eminent guests are gathered.
自惭居处崇，	Ashamed though I am of my high position
未睹斯民康。	While people lead unhappy lives,
理会是非遣，	Let us reasonably banish care
性达形迹忘。	And just be friends, enjoying nature.
鲜肥属时禁，	Though we have to go without fish and meat,
蔬果幸见尝。	There are fruits and vegetables aplenty.
俯饮一杯酒，	We bow, we take our cups of wine,
仰聆金玉章。	We give our attention to beautiful poems.
神欢体自轻，	When the mind is exalted, the body is lightened
意欲淩风翔。	And feels as if it could float in the wind.
吴中盛文史，	Suzhou is famed as a centre of letters;
群彦今汪洋。	And all you writers, coming here,
方知大蕃地，	Prove that the name of a great land
岂曰财赋强？	Is made by better things than wealth.
凄凄去亲爱，	Wistful, away from my friends and kin,
泛泛入烟雾；	Through mist and fog I float and float
归棹洛阳人，	With the sail that bears me toward Loyang.
残钟广陵树。	In Yangzhou trees linger bell-notes of evening,
今朝为此别，	Marking the day and the place of our parting.
何处还相遇？	When shall we meet again and where?
世事波上舟，	Destiny is a boat on the waves,
沿洄安得住。	Borne to and fro, beyond our will.
今朝郡斋冷，	My office has grown cold today;
忽念山中客；	And I suddenly think of my mountain friend
涧底束荆薪，	Gathering firewood down in the valley
归来煮白石。	Or boiling white stones for potatoes in his hut.
欲持一瓢酒，	I wish I might take him a cup of wine
远慰风雨夕；	To cheer him through the evening storm;
落叶满空山，	But in fallen leaves that have heaped the bare slopes,
何处寻行迹。	How should I ever find his footprints!
客从东方来，	Out of the east you visit me,
衣上灞陵雨。	With the rain of Baling still on your clothes,
问客何为来？	I ask you what you have come here for;
采山因买斧。	You say: "To buy an ax for cutting wood in the mountains"
冥冥花正开，	Hidden deep in a haze of blossom,
扬扬燕新乳。	Swallow fledglings chirp at ease
昨别今已春，	As they did when we parted, a year ago.
鬓丝生几缕。	How grey our temples have grown since them!
落帆逗淮镇，	Furling my sail near the town of Huai,
停舫临孤驿。	I find for harbor a little cove
浩浩风起波，	Where a sudden breeze whips up the waves.
冥冥日沈夕。	The sun is growing dim now and sinks in the dusk.
人归山郭暗，	People are coming home. The bright mountain-peak darkens.
雁下芦洲白。	Wild-geese fly down to an island of white weeds.
独夜忆秦关，	At midnight I think of a northern city-gate,
听钟未眠客。	And I hear a bell tolling between me and sleep.
吏舍跼终年，	From office confinement all year long,
出郊旷清曙。	I have come out of town to be free this morning
杨柳散和风，	Where willows harmonize the wind
青山澹吾虑。	And green hills lighten the cares of the world.
依丛适自憩，	I lean by a tree and rest myself
缘涧还复去。	Or wander up and down a stream.
微雨霭芳原，	Mists have wet the fragrant meadows;
春鸠鸣何处？	A spring dove calls from some hidden place.
乐幽心屡止，	With quiet surroundings, the mind is at peace,
遵事迹犹遽；	But beset with affairs, it grows restless again.
终罢斯结庐，	Here I shall finally build me a cabin,
慕陶真可庶。	As Tao Qian built one long ago.
永日方戚戚，	My heart has been heavy all day long
出行复悠悠。	Because you have so far to go.
女子今有行，	The marriage of a girl, away from her parents,
大江溯轻舟。	Is the launching of a little boat on a great river.
尔辈苦无恃，	You were very young when your mother died,
抚念益慈柔；	Which made me the more tender of you.
幼为长所育，	Your elder sister has looked out for you,
两别泣不休。	And now you are both crying and cannot part.
对此结中肠，	This makes my grief the harder to bear;
义往难复留。	Yet it is right that you should go.
自小阙内训，	Having had from childhood no mother to guide you,
事姑贻我忧；	How will you honor your mother-in-law?
赖兹托令门，	It's an excellent family; they will be kind to you,
仁恤庶无尤。	They will forgive you your mistakes
贫俭诚所尚，	Although ours has been so pure and poor
资从岂待周！	That you can take them no great dowry.
孝恭遵妇道，	Be gentle and respectful, as a woman should be,
容止顺其猷。	Careful of word and look, observant of good example.
别离在今晨，	After this morning we separate,
见尔当何秋？	There's no knowing for how long.
居闲始自遣，	I always try to hide my feelings
临感忽难收。	They are suddenly too much for me,
归来视幼女，	When I turn and see my younger daughter
零泪缘缨流。	With the tears running down her cheek.
汲井漱寒齿，	I clean my teeth in water drawn from a cold well;
清心拂尘服，	And while I brush my clothes, I purify my mind;
闲持贝叶书，	Then, slowly turning pages in the Tree-Leaf Book,
步出东斋读。	I recite, along the path to the eastern shelter.
真源了无取，	The world has forgotten the true fountain of this teaching
忘迹世所逐；	And people enslave themselves to miracles and fables.
遗言冀可冥，	Under the given words I want the essential meaning,
缮性何由熟？	I look for the simplest way to sow and reap my nature.
道人庭宇静，	Here in the quiet of the priest's temple-courtyard,
苔色连深竹；	Mosses add their climbing color to the thick bamboo;
日出雾露余，	And now comes the sun, out of mist and fog,
青松如膏沐。	And pines that seem to be new-bathed;
澹然离言说，	And everything is gone from me, speech goes, and reading,
悟悦心自足。	Leaving the single unison.
久为簪组累，	I had so long been troubled by official hat and robe
幸此南夷谪。	That I am glad to be an exile here in this wild southland.
闲依农圃邻，	I am a neighbor now of planters and reapers.
偶似山林客。	I am a guest of the mountains and woods.
晓耕翻露草，	I plough in the morning, turning dewy grasses,
夜榜响溪石，	And at evening tie my fisher-boat, breaking the quiet stream.
来往不逢人，	Back and forth I go, scarcely meeting anyone,
长歌楚天碧。	And sing a long poem and gaze at the blue sky.
蝉鸣空桑林，	Cicadas complain of thin mulberry-trees
八月萧关道；	In the Eighth-month chill at the frontier pass.
出塞复入塞，	Through the gate and back again, all along the road,
处处黄芦草。	There is nothing anywhere but yellow reeds and grasses
从来幽并客，	And the bones of soldiers from You and from Bing
皆向沙场老；	Who have buried their lives in the dusty sand.
莫学游侠儿，	Let never a cavalier stir you to envy
矜夸紫骝好。	With boasts of his horse and his horsemanship
饮马渡秋水，	Drink, my horse, while we cross the autumn water!-
水寒风似刀。	The stream is cold and the wind like a sword,
平沙日未没，	As we watch against the sunset on the sandy plain,
黯黯见临洮。	Far, far away, shadowy Lingtao.
昔日长城战，	Old battles, waged by those long walls,
咸言意气高；	Once were proud on all men's tongues.
黄尘足今古，	But antiquity now is a yellow dust,
白骨乱蓬蒿。	Confusing in the grasses its ruins and white bones.
明月出天山，	The bright moon lifts from the Mountain of Heaven
苍茫云海间；	In an infinite haze of cloud and sea,
长风几万里，	And the wind, that has come a thousand miles,
吹度玉门关。	Beats at the Jade Pass battlements.
汉下白登道，	China marches its men down Baideng Road
胡窥青海湾。	While Tartar troops peer across blue waters of the bay.
由来征战地，	And since not one battle famous in history
不见有人还。	Sent all its fighters back again,
戍客望边色，	The soldiers turn round, looking toward the border,
思归多苦颜；	And think of home, with wistful eyes,
高楼当此夜，	And of those tonight in the upper chambers
叹息未应闲。	Who toss and sigh and cannot rest.
秦地罗敷女，	The lovely Lo Fo of the western land
采桑绿水边。	Plucks mulberry leaves by the waterside.
素手青条上，	Across the green boughs stretches out her white hand;
红妆白日鲜。	In golden sunshine her rosy robe is dyed.
蚕饥妾欲去，	"my silkworms are hungry, I cannot stay.
五马莫留连。	Tarry not with your five-horse cab, I pray."
镜湖三百里，	On Mirror Lake outspread for miles and miles,
菡萏发荷花。	The lotus lilies in full blossom teem.
五月西施采，	In fifth moon Xi Shi gathers them with smiles,
人看隘若耶。	Watchers overwhelm the bank of Yuoye Stream.
回舟不待月，	Her boat turns back without waiting moonrise
归去越王家。	To royal house amid amorous sighs.
长安一片月，	A slip of the moon hangs over the capital;
万户捣衣声；	Ten thousand washing-mallets are pounding;
秋风吹不尽，	And the autumn wind is blowing my heart
总是玉关情。	For ever and ever toward the Jade Pass.
何日平胡虏？	Oh, when will the Tartar troops be conquered,
良人罢远征。	And my husband come back from the long campaign!
明朝驿使发，	The courier will depart next day, she's told.
一夜絮征袍。	She sews a warrior's gown all night.
素手抽针冷，	Her fingers feel the needle cold.
那堪把剪刀。	How can she hold the scissors tight?
裁缝寄远道，	The work is done, she sends it far away.
几日到临洮。	When will it reach the town where warriors stay?
妾发初覆额，	My hair had hardly covered my forehead.
折花门前剧；	I was picking flowers, paying by my door,
郎骑竹马来，	When you, my lover, on a bamboo horse,
绕床弄青梅。	Came trotting in circles and throwing green plums.
同居长干里，	We lived near together on a lane in Ch'ang-kan,
两小无嫌猜。	Both of us young and happy-hearted.
十四为君妇，	At fourteen I became your wife,
羞颜未尝开；	So bashful that I dared not smile,
低头向暗壁，	And I lowered my head toward a dark corner
千唤不一回，	And would not turn to your thousand calls;
十五始展眉，	But at fifteen I straightened my brows and laughed,
愿同尘与灰；	Learning that no dust could ever seal our love,
常存抱柱信，	That even unto death I would await you by my post
岂上望夫台？	And would never lose heart in the tower of silent watching.
十六君远行，	Then when I was sixteen, you left on a long journey
瞿塘滟滪堆；	Through the Gorges of Ch'u-t'ang, of rock and whirling water.
五月不可触，	And then came the Fifth-month, more than I could bear,
猿鸣天上哀。	And I tried to hear the monkeys in your lofty far-off sky.
门前迟行迹，	Your footprints by our door, where I had watched you go,
一一生绿苔；	Were hidden, every one of them, under green moss,
苔深不能扫，	Hidden under moss too deep to sweep away.
落叶秋风早。	And the first autumn wind added fallen leaves.
八月蝴蝶来，	And now, in the Eighth-month, yellowing butterflies
双飞西园草。	Hover, two by two, in our west-garden grasses
感此伤妾心，	And, because of all this, my heart is breaking
坐愁红颜老。	And I fear for my bright cheeks, lest they fade.
早晚下三巴，	Oh, at last, when you return through the three Pa districts,
预将书报家；	Send me a message home ahead!
相迎不道远，	And I will come and meet you and will never mind the distance,
直至长风沙。	All the way to Chang-feng Sha.
梧桐相待老，	Lakka-trees ripen two by two
鸳鸯会双死；	And mandarin-ducks die side by side.
贞妇贵殉夫，	If a true-hearted girl will love only her husband,
舍生亦如此。	In a life as faithfully lived as theirs,
波澜誓不起，	What troubling wave can arrive to vex
妾心井中水。	A spirit like water in a timeless well?
慈母手中线，	The thread in the hands of a fond-hearted mother
游子身上衣；	Makes clothes for the body of her wayward boy;
临行密密缝，	Carefully she sews and thoroughly she mends,
意恐迟迟归。	Dreading the delays that will keep him late from home.
谁言寸草心，	But how much love has the inch-long grass
报得三春辉？	For three spring months of the light of the sun?
前不见古人，	Where, before me, are the ages that have gone?
后不见来者；	And where, behind me, are the coming generations?
念天地之悠悠，	I think of heaven and earth, without limit, without end,
独怆然而涕下。	And I am all alone and my tears fall down.
男儿事长征，	There once was a man, sent on military missions,
少小幽燕客，	A wanderer, from youth, on the You and Yan frontiers.
赌胜马蹄下，	Under the horses' hoofs he would meet his foes
由来轻七尺；	And, recklessly risking his seven-foot body,
杀人莫敢前，	Would slay whoever dared confront
须如蝟毛磔。	Those mustaches that bristled like porcupine-quills.
黄云陇底白雪飞，	There were dark clouds below the hills, there were white clouds above them,
未得报恩不能归。	But before a man has served full time, how can he go back?
辽东小妇年十五，	In eastern Liao a girl was waiting, a girl of fifteen years,
惯弹琵琶解歌舞，	Deft with a guitar, expert in dance and song.
今为羌笛出塞声，	She seems to be fluting, even now, a reed-song of home,
使我三军泪如雨。	Filling every soldier's eyes with homesick tears.
四月南风大麦黄，	In the Fourth-month the south wind blows plains of yellow barley,
枣花未落桐叶长。	Date-flowers have not faded yet and lakka-leaves are long.
青山朝别暮还见，	The green peak that we left at dawn we still can see at evening,
嘶马出门思故乡。	While our horses whinny on the road, eager to turn homeward.
陈侯立身何坦荡？	Chen, my friend, you have always been a great and good man,
虬须虎眉仍大颡。	With your dragon's mustache, tiger's eyebrows and your massive forehead.
腹中贮书一万卷，	In your bosom you have shelved away ten thousand volumes.
不肯低头在草莽。	You have held your head high, never bowed it in the dust.
东门酤酒饮我曹，	After buying us wine and pledging us, here at the eastern gate,
心轻万事皆鸿毛，	And taking things as lightly as a wild-goose feather,
醉卧不知白日暮，	Flat you lie, tipsy, forgetting the white sun;
有时空望孤云高。	But now and then you open your eyes and gaze at a high lone cloud.
长河浪头连天黑，	The tide-head of the lone river joins the darkening sky.
津口停舟渡不得；	The ferryman beaches his boat. It has grown too late to sail.
郑国游人未及家，	And people on their way from Cheng cannot go home,
洛阳行子空叹息。	And people from Loyang sigh with disappointment.
闻道故林相识多，	I have heard about the many friends around your wood land dwelling.
罢官昨日今如何。	Yesterday you were dismissed. Are they your friends today?
主人有酒欢今夕，	Our host, providing abundant wine to make the night mellow,
请奏鸣琴广陵客。	Asks his guest from Yangzhou to play for us on the lute.
月照城头乌半飞，	Toward the moon that whitens the city-wall, black crows are flying,
霜凄万树风入衣；	Frost is on ten thousand trees, and the wind blows through our clothes;
铜炉华烛烛增辉，	But a copper stove has added its light to that of flowery candles,
初弹渌水后楚妃。	And the lute plays The Green Water, and then The Queen of Chu.
一声已动物皆静，	Once it has begun to play, there is no other sound:
四座无言星欲稀。	A spell is on the banquet, while the stars grow thin.
清淮奉使千余里，	But three hundred miles from here, in Huai, official duties await him,
敢告云山从此始。	And so it's farewell, and the road again, under cloudy mountains.
蔡女昔造胡笳声，	When this melody for the flageolet was made by Lady Cai,
一弹一十有八拍。	When long ago one by one she sang its eighteen stanzas,
胡人落泪沾边草，	Even the Tartars were shedding tears into the border grasses,
汉使断肠对归客。	And the envoy of China was heart-broken, turning back home with his escort.
古戍苍苍烽火寒，	Cold fires now of old battles are grey on ancient forts,
大荒沈沈飞雪白。	And the wilderness is shadowed with white new-flying snow.
先拂声弦后角羽，	When the player first brushes the Shang string and the Jue and then the Yu,
四郊秋叶惊摵摵。	Autumn-leaves in all four quarters are shaken with a murmur.
董夫子通神明，	Dong, the master, must have been taught in heaven.
深山窃听来妖精。	Demons come from the deep pine-wood and stealthily listen
言迟更速皆应手，	To music slow, then quick, following his hand,
将往复旋如有情。	Now far away, now near again, according to his heart.
空山百鸟散还合，	A hundred birds from an empty mountain scatter and return;
万里浮云阴且晴。	Three thousand miles of floating clouds darken and lighten;
嘶酸雏雁失群夜，	A wild-goose fledgling, left behind, cries for its flock,
断绝胡儿恋母声。	And a Tartar child for the mother he loves.
川为静其波，	Then river waves are calmed
鸟亦罢其鸣；	And birds are mute that were singing,
乌孙部落家乡远，	And Wuzu tribes are homesick for their distant land,
逻娑沙尘哀怨生。	And out of the dust of Siberian steppes rises a plaintive sorrow.
幽音变调忽飘洒，	Suddenly the low sound leaps to a freer tune,
长风吹林雨堕瓦；	Like a long wind swaying a forest, a downpour breaking tiles,
迸泉飒飒飞木末，	A cascade through the air, flying over tree-tops.
野鹿呦呦走堂下。	A wild deer calls to his fellows. He is running among the mansions
长安城连东掖垣，	In the corner of the capital by the Eastern Palace wall.
凤凰池对青琐门，	Phoenix Lake lies opposite the Gate of Green Jade;
高才脱略名与利，	But how can fame and profit concern a man of genius?
日夕望君抱琴至。	Day and night I long for him to bring his lute again.
南山截竹为觱篥，	Bamboo from the southern hills was used to make this pipe.
此乐本自龟兹出。	And its music, that was introduced from Persia first of all,
流传汉地曲转奇，	Has taken on new magic through later use in China.
凉州胡人为我吹；	And now the Tartar from Liangzhou, blowing it for me,
傍邻闻者多叹息，	Drawing a sigh from whosoever hears it,
远客思乡皆泪垂。	Is bringing to a wanderer's eyes homesick tears.
世人解听不解赏，	Many like to listen; but few understand.
长飙风中自来往。	To and fro at will there's a long wind flying,
枯桑老柏寒飕飗，	Dry mulberry-trees, old cypresses, trembling in its chill.
九雏鸣凤乱啾啾。	There are nine baby phoenixes, outcrying one another;
龙吟虎啸一时发，	A dragon and a tiger spring up at the same moment;
万籁百泉相与秋。	Then in a hundred waterfalls ten thousand songs of autumn
忽然更作渔阳掺，	Are suddenly changing to The Yuyang Lament;
黄云萧条白日暗。	And when yellow clouds grow thin and the white sun darkens,
变调如闻杨柳春，	They are changing still again to Spring in the Willow Trees.
上林繁花照眼新。	Like Imperial Garden flowers, brightening the eye with beauty,
岁夜高堂列明烛，	Are the high-hall candles we have lighted this cold night,
美酒一杯声一曲。	And with every cup of wine goes another round of music.
山寺钟鸣昼已昏，	A bell in the mountain-temple sounds the coming of night.
渔梁渡头争渡喧；	I hear people at the fishing-town stumble aboard the ferry,
人随沙路向江村，	While others follow the sand-bank to their homes along the river.
余亦乘舟归鹿门。	I also take a boat and am bound for Lumen Mountain
鹿门月照开烟树，	And soon the Lumen moonlight is piercing misty trees.
忽到庞公栖隐处；	I have come, before I know it, upon an ancient hermitage,
岩扉松径长寂寥，	The thatch door, the piney path, the solitude, the quiet,
惟有幽人自来去。	Where a hermit lives and moves, never needing a companion.
我本楚狂人，	I am the madman of the Chu country
凤歌笑孔丘。	Who sang a mad song disputing Confucius.
手持绿玉杖，	Holding in my hand a staff of green jade,
朝别黄鹤楼；	I have crossed, since morning at the Yellow Crane Terrace,
五岳寻仙不辞远，	All five Holy Mountains, without a thought of distance,
一生好入名山游。	According to the one constant habit of my life.
庐山秀出南斗傍，	Lu Mountain stands beside the Southern Dipper
屏风九叠云锦张；	In clouds reaching silken like a nine-panelled screen,
影落明湖青黛光，	With its shadows in a crystal lake deepening the green water.
金阙前开二峰长。	The Golden Gate opens into two mountain-ranges.
银河倒挂三石梁，	A silver stream is hanging down to three stone bridges
香炉瀑布遥相望。	Within sight of the mighty Tripod Falls.
回崖沓障淩苍苍，	Ledges of cliff and winding trails lead to blue sky
翠影红霞映朝日，	And a flush of cloud in the morning sun,
鸟飞不到吴天长。	Whence no flight of birds could be blown into Wu.
登高壮观天地间，	I climb to the top. I survey the whole world.
大江茫茫去不黄。	I see the long river that runs beyond return,
黄云万里动风色，	Yellow clouds that winds have driven hundreds of miles
白波九道流雪山。	And a snow-peak whitely circled by the swirl of a ninefold stream.
好为庐山谣，	And so I am singing a song of Lu Mountain,
兴因庐山发。	A song that is born of the breath of Lu Mountain.
闲窥石镜清我心，	Where the Stone Mirror makes the heart's purity purer
谢公行处苍苔没。	And green moss has buried the footsteps of Xie,
早服还丹无世情，	I have eaten the immortal pellet and, rid of the world's troubles,
琴心三叠道初成；	Before the lute's third playing have achieved my element.
遥见仙人彩云里，	Far away I watch the angels riding colored clouds
手把芙蓉朝玉京。	Toward heaven's Jade City, with hibiscus in their hands.
先期汗漫九垓上，	And so, when I have traversed the nine sections of the world,
愿接卢敖游太清。	I will follow Saint Luao up the Great Purity.
海客谈瀛洲，	A seafaring visitor will talk about Japan,
烟涛微茫信难求。	Which waters and mists conceal beyond approach;
越人语天姥，	But Yueh people talk about Heavenly Mother Mountain,
云霓明灭或可睹。	Still seen through its varying deeps of cloud.
天姥连天向天横，	In a straight line to heaven, its summit enters heaven,
势拔五岳掩赤城；	Tops the five Holy Peaks, and casts a shadow through
天台四万八千丈，	China With the hundred-mile length of the Heavenly Terrace Range,
对此欲倒东南倾。	Which, just at this point, begins turning southeast.
我欲因之梦吴越，	My heart and my dreams are in Wu and Yueh
一夜飞渡镜湖月。	And they cross Mirror Lake all night in the moon.
湖月照我影，	And the moon lights my shadow
送我至剡溪；	And me to Yan River
谢公宿处今尚在，	With the hermitage of Xie still there
渌水荡漾清猿啼。	And the monkeys calling clearly over ripples of green water.
脚著谢公屐，	I wear his pegged boots
身登青云梯。	Up a ladder of blue cloud,
半壁见海日，	Sunny ocean half-way,
空中闻天鸡。	Holy cock-crow in space,
千岩万壑路不定，	Myriad peaks and more valleys and nowhere a road.
迷花倚石忽已暝。	Flowers lure me, rocks ease me. Day suddenly ends.
熊咆龙吟殷岩泉，	Bears, dragons, tempestuous on mountain and river,
栗深林兮惊层巅。	Startle the forest and make the heights tremble.
云青青兮欲雨，	Clouds darken with darkness of rain,
水澹澹兮生烟。	Streams pale with pallor of mist.
列缺霹雳，	The Gods of Thunder and Lightning
邱峦崩摧，	Shatter the whole range.
洞天石扇，	The stone gate breaks asunder
訇然中开；	Venting in the pit of heaven,
青冥浩荡不见底，	An impenetrable shadow.
日月照耀金银台。	But now the sun and moon illumine a gold and silver terrace,
霓为衣兮风为马，	And, clad in rainbow garments, riding on the wind,
云之君兮纷纷而来下；	Come the queens of all the clouds, descending one by one,
虎鼓瑟兮鸾回车。	With tigers for their lute-players and phoenixes for dancers.
仙之人兮列如麻。	Row upon row, like fields of hemp, range the fairy figures.
忽魂悸以魄动，	I move, my soul goes flying,
怳惊起而长嗟。	I wake with a long sigh,
惟觉时之枕席，	My pillow and my matting
失向来之烟霞。	Are the lost clouds I was in.
世间行乐亦如此，	And this is the way it always is with human joy:
古来万事东流水。	Ten thousand things run for ever like water toward the east.
别君去兮何时还？	And so I take my leave of you, not knowing for how long.
且放白鹿青崖间。	But let me, on my green slope, raise a white deer
须行即骑访名山，	And ride to you, great mountain, when I have need of you.
安能摧眉折腰事权贵，	Oh, how can I gravely bow and scrape to men of high rank and men of high office
使我不得开心颜？	Who never will suffer being shown an honest-hearted face!
风吹柳花满店香，	A wind, bringing willow-cotton, sweetens the shop,
吴姬压酒唤客尝；	And a girl from Wu, pouring wine, urges me to share it
金陵子弟来相送，	With my comrades of the city who are here to see me off;
欲行不行各尽觞。	And as each of them drains his cup, I say to him in parting,
请君试问东流水，	Oh, go and ask this river running to the east
别意与之谁短长？	If it can travel farther than a friend's love!
弃我去者昨日之日不可留；	Since yesterday had to throw me and bolt,
乱我心者今日之日多烦忧。	Today has hurt my heart even more.
长风万里送秋雁，	The autumn wild-geese have a long wind for escort
对此可以酣高楼。	As I face them from this villa, drinking my wine.
蓬莱文章建安骨，	The bones of great writers are your brushes, in the School of Heaven,
中间小谢又清发，	And I am a Lesser Xie growing up by your side.
俱怀逸兴壮思飞，	We both are exalted to distant thought,
欲上青天览明月。	Aspiring to the sky and the bright moon.
抽刀断水水更流，	But since water still flows, though we cut it with our swords,
举杯销愁愁更愁。	And sorrows return, though we drown them with wine,
人生在世不称意，	Since the world can in no way answer our craving,
明朝散发弄扁舟。	I will loosen my hair tomorrow and take to a fishing-boat.
君不见走马川行雪海边，	TO GENERAL FENG OF THE WESTERN EXPEDITION
平沙莽莽黄入天。	Look how swift to the snowy sea races Running-Horse River!
轮台九月风夜吼，	And sand, up from the desert, flies yellow into heaven.
一川碎石大如斗，	This Ninth-month night is blowing cold at Wheel Tower,
随风满地石乱走。	And valleys, like peck measures, fill with the broken boulders
匈奴草黄马正肥，	That downward, headlong, follow the wind.
金山西见烟尘飞，	In spite of grey grasses, Tartar horses are plump;
汉家大将西出师。	West of the Hill of Gold, smoke and dust gather.
将军金甲夜不脱，	O General of the Chinese troops, start your campaign!
半夜军行戈相拨，	Keep your iron armor on all night long,
风头如刀面如割。	Send your soldiers forward with a clattering of weapons!
马毛带雪汗气蒸，	While the sharp wind's point cuts the face like a knife,
五花连钱旋作冰，	And snowy sweat steams on the horses' backs,
幕中草檄砚水凝。	Freezing a pattern of five-flower coins,
虏骑闻之应胆慑，	Your challenge from camp, from an inkstand of ice,
料知短兵不敢接，	Has chilled the barbarian chieftain's heart.
车师西门伫献捷。	You will have no more need of an actual battle!
轮台城头夜吹角，	On Wheel Tower parapets night-bugles are blowing,
轮台城北旄头落。	Though the flag at the northern end hangs limp.
羽书昨夜过渠黎，	Scouts, in the darkness, are passing Quli,
单于已在金山西。	Where, west of the Hill of Gold, the Tartar chieftain has halted
戍楼西望烟尘黑，	We can see, from the look-out, the dust and black smoke
汉兵屯在轮台北。	Where Chinese troops are camping, north of Wheel Tower.
上将拥旄西出征，	Our flags now beckon the General farther west
平明吹笛大军行。	With bugles in the dawn he rouses his Grand Army;
四边伐鼓雪海涌，	Drums like a tempest pound on four sides
三军大呼阴山动。	And the Yin Mountains shake with the shouts of ten thousand;
虏塞兵气连云屯，	Clouds and the war-wind whirl up in a point
战场白骨缠草根。	Over fields where grass-roots will tighten around white bones;
剑河风急雪片阔，	In the Dagger River mist, through a biting wind,
沙口石冻马蹄脱。	Horseshoes, at the Sand Mouth line, break on icy boulders.
亚相勤王甘苦辛，	Our General endures every pain, every hardship,
誓将报主静边尘。	Commanded to settle the dust along the border.
古来青史谁不见？	We have read, in the Green Books, tales of old days
今见功名胜古人。	But here we behold a living man, mightier than the dead.
北风卷地白草折，	The north wind rolls the white grasses and breaks them;
胡天八月即飞雪；	And the Eighth-month snow across the Tartar sky
忽如一夜春风来，	Is like a spring gale, come up in the night,
千树万树梨花开。	Blowing open the petals of ten thousand peartrees.
散入珠帘湿罗幕，	It enters the pearl blinds, it wets the silk curtains;
狐裘不暖锦衾薄。	A fur coat feels cold, a cotton mat flimsy;
将军角弓不得控，	Bows become rigid, can hardly be drawn
都护铁衣冷犹著。	And the metal of armor congeals on the men;
瀚海阑干百丈冰，	The sand-sea deepens with fathomless ice,
愁云黪淡万里凝。	And darkness masses its endless clouds;
中军置酒饮归客，	But we drink to our guest bound home from camp,
胡琴琵琶与羌笛。	And play him barbarian lutes, guitars, harps;
纷纷暮雪下辕门，	Till at dusk, when the drifts are crushing our tents
风掣红旗冻不翻。	And our frozen red flags cannot flutter in the wind,
轮台东门送君去，	We watch him through Wheel-Tower Gate going eastward.
去时雪满天山路；	Into the snow-mounds of Heaven-Peak Road.
山回路转不见君，	And then he disappears at the turn of the pass,
雪上空留马行处。	Leaving behind him only hoof-prints.
国初以来画鞍马，	Throughout this dynasty no one had painted horses
神妙独数江都王。	Like the master-spirit, Prince Jiangdu --
将军得名三十载，	And then to General Cao through his thirty years of fame
人间又见真乘黄。	The world's gaze turned, for royal steeds.
曾貌先帝照夜白，	He painted the late Emperor's luminous white horse.
龙池十日飞霹雳，	For ten days the thunder flew over Dragon Lake,
内府殷红玛瑙盘，	And a pink-agate plate was sent him from the palace-
婕妤传诏才人索。	The talk of the court-ladies, the marvel of all eyes.
盘赐将军拜舞归，	The General danced, receiving it in his honored home
轻纨细绮相追飞；	After this rare gift, followed rapidly fine silks
贵戚权门得笔迹，	From many of the nobles, requesting that his art
始觉屏障生光辉。	Lend a new lustre to their screens.
昔日太宗拳毛騧，	..First came the curly-maned horse of Emperor Taizong,
近时郭家狮子花。	Then, for the Guos, a lion-spotted horse..
今之新图有二马，	But now in this painting I see two horses,
复令识者久叹嗟，	A sobering sight for whosoever knew them.
此皆骑战一敌万，	They are war- horses. Either could face ten thousand.
缟素漠漠开风沙。	They make the white silk stretch away into a vast desert.
其余七匹亦殊绝，	And the seven others with them are almost as noble
迥若寒空杂烟雪；	Mist and snow are moving across a cold sky,
霜蹄蹴踏长楸间，	And hoofs are cleaving snow-drifts under great trees-
马官厮养森成列。	With here a group of officers and there a group of servants.
可怜九马争神骏，	See how these nine horses all vie with one another-
顾视清高气深稳。	The high clear glance, the deep firm breath.
借问苦心爱者谁？	..Who understands distinction? Who really cares for art?
后有韦讽前支盾。	You, Wei Feng, have followed Cao; Zhidun preceded him.
忆昔巡幸新丰宫，	..I remember when the late Emperor came toward his Summer Palace,
翠花拂天来向东；	The procession, in green-feathered rows, swept from the eastern sky
腾骧磊落三万匹，	Thirty thousand horses, prancing, galloping,
皆与此图筋骨同。	Fashioned, every one of them, like the horses in this picture.
自从献宝朝河宗，	But now the Imperial Ghost receives secret jade from the River God,
无复射蛟江水中。	For the Emperor hunts crocodiles no longer by the streams.
君不见金粟堆前松柏里，	Where you see his Great Gold Tomb, you may hear among the pines
龙媒去尽鸟呼风。	A bird grieving in the wind that the Emperor's horses are gone.
将军魏武之子孙，	O General, descended from Wei's Emperor Wu,
于今为庶为青门；	You are nobler now than when a noble.
英雄割据虽已矣！	Conquerors and their velour perish,
文采风流今尚存。	But masters of beauty live forever.
学书初学卫夫人，	With your brush-work learned from Lady Wei
但恨无过王右军。	And second only to Wang Xizhi's,
丹青不知老将至，	Faithful to your art, you know no age,
富贵于我如浮云。	Letting wealth and fame drift by like clouds.
开元之中常引见，	In the years of Kaiyuan you were much with the Emperor,
承恩数上南熏殿，	Accompanied him often to the Court of the South Wind.
凌烟功臣少颜色，	When the spirit left great statesmen, on walls of the Hall of Fame
将军下笔开生面。	The point of your brush preserved their living faces.
良相头上进贤冠，	You crowned all the premiers with coronets of office;
猛将腰间大羽箭。	You fitted all commanders with arrows at their girdles;
褒公鄂公毛发动，	You made the founders of this dynasty, with every hair alive,
英姿飒爽犹酣战。	Seem to be just back from the fierceness of a battle.
先帝天马玉花骢，	The late Emperor had a horse, known as Jade Flower,
画工如山貌不同。	Whom artists had copied in various poses.
是日牵来赤墀下，	They led him one day to the red marble stairs
迥立阊阖生长风。	With his eyes toward the palace in the deepening air.
诏谓将军拂绢素，	Then, General, commanded to proceed with your work,
意匠惨淡经营中；	You centered all your being on a piece of silk.
斯须九重真龙出，	And later, when your dragon-horse, born of the sky,
一洗万古凡马空。	Had banished earthly horses for ten thousand generations,
玉花却在御榻上，	There was one Jade Flower standing on the dais
榻上庭前屹相向；	And another by the steps, and they marveled at each other.
至尊含笑催赐金，	The Emperor rewarded you with smiles and with gifts,
圉人太仆皆惆怅，	While officers and men of the stud hung about and stared.
弟子韩干早入室，	Han Gan, your follower, has likewise grown proficient
亦能画马穷殊相；	At representing horses in all their attitudes;
干惟画肉不画骨，	But picturing the flesh, he fails to draw the bone-
忍使骅骝气凋丧。	So that even the finest are deprived of their spirit.
将军画善盖有神，	You, beyond the mere skill, used your art divinely-
偶逢佳士亦写真；	And expressed, not only horses, but the life of a good man.
即今漂泊干戈际，	Yet here you are, wandering in a world of disorder
屡貌寻常行路人。	And sketching from time to time some petty passerby
涂穷反遭俗眼白，	People note your case with the whites of their eyes.
世上未有如公贫；	There's nobody purer, there's nobody poorer.
但看古来盛名下，	Read in the records, from earliest times,
终日坎壈缠其身。	How hard it is to be a great artist.
今我不乐思岳阳，	I am sad. My thoughts are in Youzhou.
身欲奋飞病在床。	I would hurry there-but I am sick in bed.
美人娟娟隔秋水，	Beauty would be facing me across the autumn waters.
濯足洞庭望八荒。	Oh, to wash my feet in Lake Dongting and see at its eight corners
鸿飞冥冥日月白，	Wild-geese flying high, sun and moon both white,
青枫叶赤天雨霜。	Green maples changing to red in the frosty sky,
玉京群帝集北斗，	Angels bound for the Capital of Heaven, near the North Star,
或骑麒麟翳凤凰。	Riding, some of them phoenixes, and others unicorns,
芙蓉旌旗烟雾落，	With banners of hibiscus and with melodies of mist,
影动倒景摇潇湘。	Their shadows dancing upside-down in the southern rivers,
星宫之君醉琼浆，	Till the Queen of the Stars, drowsy with her nectar,
羽人稀少不在旁。	Would forget the winged men on either side of her!
似闻昨者赤松子，	From the Wizard of the Red Pine this word has come for me:
恐是汉代韩张良；	That after his earlier follower he has now a new disciple
昔随刘氏定长安，	Who, formerly at the capital as Emperor Liu's adviser,
帷幄未改神惨伤。	In spite of great successes, never could be happy.
国家成败吾岂敢？	What are a country's rise and fall?
色难腥腐餐枫香。	Can flesh-pots be as fragrant as mountain fruit?.
周南留滞古所惜，	I grieve that he is lost far away in the south.
南极老人应寿昌。	May the star of long life accord him its blessing!
美人胡为隔秋水？	O purity, to seize you from beyond the autumn waters
焉得置之贡玉堂。	And to place you as an offering in the Court of Imperial Jade.
孔明庙前有老柏，	Beside the Temple of the Great Premier stands an ancient cypress
柯如青铜根如石；	With a trunk of green bronze and a root of stone.
双皮溜雨四十围，	The girth of its white bark would be the reach of forty men
黛色参天二千尺。	And its tip of kingfish-blue is two thousand feet in heaven.
君臣已与时际会，	Dating from the days of a great ruler's great statesman,
树木犹为人爱惜。	Their very tree is loved now and honored by the people.
云来气接巫峡长，	Clouds come to it from far away, from the Wu cliffs,
月出寒通雪山白。	And the cold moon glistens on its peak of snow.
忆昨路绕锦亭东，	East of the Silk Pavilion yesterday I found
先主武侯同閟宫。	The ancient ruler and wise statesman both worshipped in one temple,
崔嵬枝干郊原古，	Whose tree, with curious branches, ages the whole landscape
窈窕丹青户牖空。	In spite of the fresh colors of the windows and the doors.
落落盘踞虽得地，	And so firm is the deep root, so established underground,
冥冥孤高多烈风。	That its lone lofty boughs can dare the weight of winds,
扶持自是神明力，	Its only protection the Heavenly Power,
正直元因造化功。	Its only endurance the art of its Creator.
大厦如倾要梁栋，	Though oxen sway ten thousand heads, they cannot move a mountain.
万牛回首丘山重。	When beams are required to restore a great house,
不露文章世已惊，	Though a tree writes no memorial, yet people understand
未辞剪伐谁能送？	That not unless they fell it can use be made of it.
苦心岂免容蝼蚁？	Its bitter heart may be tenanted now by black and white ants,
香叶终经宿鸾凤。	But its odorous leaves were once the nest of phoenixes and pheasants.
志士幽人莫怨嗟，	Let wise and hopeful men harbor no complaint.
古来材大难为用。	The greater the timber, the tougher it is to use.
昔有佳人公孙氏，	There lived years ago the beautiful Gongsun,
一舞剑器动四方。	Who, dancing with her dagger, drew from all four quarters
观者如山色沮丧，	An audience like mountains lost among themselves.
天地为之久低昂。	Heaven and earth moved back and forth, following her motions,
霍如羿射九日落，	Which were bright as when the Archer shot the nine suns down the sky
矫如群帝骖龙翔，	And rapid as angels before the wings of dragons.
来如雷霆收震怒，	She began like a thunderbolt, venting its anger,
罢如江海凝清光。	And ended like the shining calm of rivers and the sea..
绛唇珠袖两寂寞，	But vanished are those red lips and those pearly sleeves;
晚有弟子传芬芳。	And none but this one pupil bears the perfume of her fame,
临颍美人在白帝，	This beauty from Lingying, at the Town of the White God,
妙舞此曲神扬扬。	Dancing still and singing in the old blithe way.
与余问答既有以，	And while we reply to each other's questions,
感时抚事增惋伤。	We sigh together, saddened by changes that have come.
先帝侍女八千人，	There were eight thousand ladies in the late Emperor's court,
公孙剑器初第一。	But none could dance the dagger-dance like Lady Gongsun.
五十年间似反掌，	..Fifty years have passed, like the turning of a palm;
风尘澒洞昏王室。	Wind and dust, filling the world, obscure the Imperial House.
梨园子弟散如烟，	Instead of the Pear-Garden Players, who have blown by like a mist,
女乐余姿映寒日。	There are one or two girl-musicians now-trying to charm the cold Sun.
金粟堆前木已拱，	There are man-size trees by the Emperor's Golden Tomb
瞿塘石城草萧瑟。	I seem to hear dead grasses rattling on the cliffs of Qutang.
玳筵急管曲复终，	..The song is done, the slow string and quick pipe have ceased.
乐极哀来月东出。	At the height of joy, sorrow comes with the eastern moon rising.
老夫不知其所往？	And I, a poor old man, not knowing where to go,
足茧荒山转愁疾。	Must harden my feet on the lone hills, toward sickness and despair.
石鱼湖，	Stone-Fish Lake
似洞庭，	like Lake Dongting
夏水欲满君山青。	When the top of Zun is green and the summer tide is rising.
山为樽，	With the mountain for a table,
水为沼，	and the lake a fount of wine,
酒徒历历坐洲鸟。	The tipplers all are settled along the sandy shore.
长风连日作大浪，	Though a stiff wind for days has roughened the water,
不能废人运酒舫。	Wine-boats constantly arrive.
我持长瓢坐巴丘，	I have a long-necked gourd and, happy on Ba Island,
酌饮四座以散愁。	I am pouring a drink in every direction doing away with care.
山石荦确行径微，	Rough were the mountain-stones, and the path very narrow;
黄昏到寺蝙蝠飞。	And when I reached the temple, bats were in the dusk.
升堂坐阶新雨足，	I climbed to the hall, sat on the steps, and drank the rain-washed air
芭蕉叶大栀子肥。	Among the round gardenia-pods and huge banana-leaves.
僧言古壁佛画好，	On the old wall, said the priest, were Buddhas finely painted,
以火来照所见稀。	And he brought a light and showed me, and I called them wonderful
铺床拂席置羹饭，	He spread the bed, dusted the mats, and made my supper ready,
疏粝亦足饱我饥。	And, though the food was coarse, it satisfied my hunger.
夜深静卧百虫绝，	At midnight, while I lay there not hearing even an insect,
清月出岭光入扉。	The mountain moon with her pure light entered my door.
天明独去无道路，	At dawn I left the mountain and, alone, lost my way:
出入高下穷烟霏。	In and out, up and down, while a heavy mist
山红涧碧纷烂漫，	Made brook and mountain green and purple, brightening everything.
时见松枥皆十围。	I am passing sometimes pines and oaks, which ten men could not girdle,
当流赤足蹋涧石，	I am treading pebbles barefoot in swift-running water
水声激激风吹衣。	Its ripples purify my ear, while a soft wind blows my garments.
人生如此自可乐，	These are the things which, in themselves, make life happy.
岂必局束为人鞿？	Why should we be hemmed about and hampered with people?
嗟哉吾党二三子，	O chosen pupils, far behind me in my own country,
安得至老不更归？	What if I spent my old age here and never went back home?
纤云四卷天无河，	The fine clouds have opened and the River of Stars is gone,
清风吹空月舒波。	A clear wind blows across the sky, and the moon widens its wave,
沙平水息声影绝，	The sand is smooth, the water still, no sound and no shadow,
一杯相属君当歌。	As I offer you a cup of wine, asking you to sing.
君歌声酸辞且苦，	But so sad is this song of yours and so bitter your voice
不能听终泪如雨。	That before I finish listening my tears have become a rain:
洞庭连天九疑高，	"Where Lake Dongting is joined to the sky by the lofty Nine-Doubt Mountain,
蛟龙出没猩鼯号。	Dragons, crocodiles, rise and sink, apes, flying foxes, whimper.
十生九死到官所，	At a ten to one risk of death, I have reached my official post,
幽居默默如藏逃。	Where lonely I live and hushed, as though I were in hiding.
下床畏蛇食畏药，	I leave my bed, afraid of snakes; I eat, fearing poisons;
海气湿蛰熏腥臊。	The air of the lake is putrid, breathing its evil odors.
昨者州前槌大鼓，	Yesterday, by the district office, the great drum was announcing
嗣皇继圣登夔皋。	The crowning of an emperor, a change in the realm.
赦书一日行万里，	The edict granting pardons runs three hundred miles a day,
罪从大辟皆除死。	All those who were to die have had their sentences commuted,
迁者追回流者还，	The unseated are promoted and exiles are recalled,
涤瑕荡垢清朝班。	Corruptions are abolished, clean officers appointed.
州家申名使家抑，	My superior sent my name in but the governor would not listen
坎轲祇得移荆蛮。	And has only transferred me to this barbaric place.
判司卑官不堪说，	My rank is very low and useless to refer to;
未免捶楚尘埃间。	They might punish me with lashes in the dust of the street.
同时辈流多上道，	Most of my fellow exiles are now returning home
天路幽险难追攀。	A journey which, to me, is a heaven beyond climbing."
君歌且休听我歌，	Stop your song, I beg you, and listen to mine,
我歌今与君殊科。	A song that is utterly different from yours:
一年明月今宵多，	"Tonight is the loveliest moon of the year.
人生由命非由他；	All else is with fate, not ours to control;
有酒不饮奈明何？	But, refusing this wine, may we choose more tomorrow?"
五岳祭秩皆三公，	The five Holy Mountains have the rank of the Three Dukes.
四方环镇嵩当中。	The other four make a ring, with the Song Mountain midmost.
火维地荒足妖怪，	To this one, in the fire-ruled south, where evil signs are rife,
天假神柄专其雄。	Heaven gave divine power, ordaining it a peer.
喷云泄雾藏半腹，	All the clouds and hazes are hidden in its girdle;
虽有绝顶谁能穷？	And its forehead is beholden only by a few.
我来正逢秋雨节，	..I came here in autumn, during the rainy season,
阴气晦昧无清风。	When the sky was overcast and the clear wind gone.
潜心默祷若有应，	I quieted my mind and prayed, hoping for an answer;
岂非正直能感通？	For assuredly righteous thinking reaches to high heaven.
须臾静扫众峰出，	And soon all the mountain-peaks were showing me their faces;
仰见突兀撑青空。	I looked up at a pinnacle that held the clean blue sky:
紫盖连延接天柱，	The wide Purple-Canopy joined the Celestial Column;
石廪腾掷堆祝融。	The Stone Granary leapt, while the Fire God stood still.
森然魄动下马拜，	Moved by this token, I dismounted to offer thanks.
松柏一迳趋灵宫。	A long path of pine and cypress led to the temple.
纷墙丹柱动光彩，	Its white walls and purple pillars shone, and the vivid color
鬼物图画填青红。	Of gods and devils filled the place with patterns of red and blue.
升阶伛偻荐脯酒，	I climbed the steps and, bending down to sacrifice, besought
欲以菲薄明其衷。	That my pure heart might be welcome, in spite of my humble offering.
庙内老人识神意，	The old priest professed to know the judgment of the God:
睢盱侦伺能鞠躬。	He was polite and reverent, making many bows.
手持杯珓导我掷，	He handed me divinity-cups, he showed me how to use them
云此最吉余难同。	And told me that my fortune was the very best of all.
窜逐蛮荒幸不死，	Though exiled to a barbarous land, mine is a happy life.
衣食才足甘长终。	Plain food and plain clothes are all I ever wanted.
侯王将相望久绝，	To be prince, duke, premier, general, was never my desire;
神纵欲福难为功。	And if the God would bless me, what better could he grant than this ?
夜投佛寺上高阁，	At night I lie down to sleep in the top of a high tower;
星月掩映云曈昽。	While moon and stars glimmer through the darkness of the clouds.
猿鸣钟动不知曙，	Apes call, a bell sounds. And ready for dawn
杲杲寒日生于东。	I see arise, far in the east the cold bright sun.
张生手持石鼓文，	Chang handed me this tracing, from the stone drums,
劝我识作石鼓歌。	Beseeching me to write a poem on the stone drums.
少陵无人谪仙死，	Du Fu has gone. Li Bai is dead.
才薄将奈石鼓何？	What can my poor talent do for the stone drums?
周纲淩迟四海沸，	When the Zhou power waned and China was bubbling,
宣王愤起挥天戈；	Emperor Xuan, up in wrath, waved his holy spear:
大开明堂受朝贺，	And opened his Great Audience, receiving all the tributes
诸侯剑佩鸣相磨。	Of kings and lords who came to him with a tune of clanging weapons.
搜于岐阳骋雄俊，	They held a hunt in Qiyang and proved their marksmanship:
万里禽兽皆遮罗。	Fallen birds and animals were strewn three thousand miles.
镌功勒成告万世，	And the exploit was recorded, to inform new generations.
凿石作鼓隳嵯峨。	Cut out of jutting cliffs, these drums made of stone-
从臣才艺咸第一，	On which poets and artisans, all of the first order,
拣选撰刻留山阿。	Had indited and chiseled-were set in the deep mountains
雨淋日炙野火燎，	To be washed by rain, baked by sun, burned by wildfire,
鬼物守护烦撝呵。	Eyed by evil spirits; and protected by the gods.
公从何处得纸本？	Where can he have found the tracing on this paper?
毫发尽备无差讹。	True to the original, not altered by a hair,
辞严义密读难晓，	The meaning deep, the phrases cryptic, difficult to read.
字体不类隶与蝌。	And the style of the characters neither square nor tadpole.
年深岂免有缺画？	Time has not yet vanquished the beauty of these letters
快剑砍断生蛟鼍。	Looking like sharp daggers that pierce live crocodiles,
鸾翔凤翥众仙下，	Like phoenix-mates dancing, like angels hovering down,
珊瑚碧树交枝柯。	Like trees of jade and coral with interlocking branches,
金绳铁索锁钮壮，	Like golden cord and iron chain tied together tight,
古鼎跃水龙腾梭。	Like incense-tripods flung in the sea, like dragons mounting heaven.
陋儒编诗不收入，	Historians, gathering ancient poems, forgot to gather these,
二雅褊迫无委蛇。	To make the two Books of Musical Song more colorful and striking;
孔子西行不到秦，	Confucius journeyed in the west, but not to the Qin Kingdom,
掎摭星宿遗羲娥。	He chose our planet and our stars but missed the sun and moon
嗟予好古生苦晚，	I who am fond of antiquity, was born too late
对此涕泪双滂沱。	And, thinking of these wonderful things, cannot hold back my tears.
忆昔初蒙博士徵，	I remember, when I was awarded my highest degree,
其年始改称元和。	During the first year of Yuanho,
故人从军在右辅，	How a friend of mine, then at the western camp,
为我度量掘臼科。	Offered to assist me in removing these old relics.
濯冠沐浴告祭酒，	I bathed and changed, then made my plea to the college president
如此至宝存岂多？	And urged on him the rareness of these most precious things.
毡包席裹可立致，	They could be wrapped in rugs, be packed and sent in boxes
十鼓祇载数骆驼。	And carried on only a few camels: ten stone drums
荐诸太庙比郜鼎，	To grace the Imperial Temple like the Incense-Pot of Gao
光价岂止百倍过。	Or their lustre and their value would increase a hundredfold,
圣恩若许留太学，	If the monarch would present them to the university,
诸生讲解得切磋。	Where students could study them and doubtless decipher them,
观经鸿都尚填咽，	And multitudes, attracted to the capital of culture
坐见举国来奔波。	Prom all corners of the Empire, would be quick to gather.
剜苔剔藓露节角，	We could scour the moss, pick out the dirt, restore the original surface,
安置妥帖平不颇。	And lodge them in a fitting and secure place for ever,
大厦深檐与盖覆，	Covered by a massive building with wide eaves
经历久远期无佗。	Where nothing more might happen to them as it had before.
中朝大官老于事，	But government officials grow fixed in their ways
讵肯感激徒媕婀？	And never will initiate beyond old precedent;
牧童敲火牛砺角，	So herd- boys strike the drums for fire, cows polish horns on them,
谁复著手为摩挲？	With no one to handle them reverentially.
日销月铄就埋没，	Still aging and decaying, soon they may be effaced.
六年西顾空吟哦。	Six years I have sighed for them, chanting toward the west.
羲之俗书趁姿媚，	The familiar script of Wang Xizhi, beautiful though it was,
数纸尚可博白鹅。	Could be had, several pages, just for a few white geese,
继周八代争战罢，	But now, eight dynasties after the Zhou, and all the wars over,
无人收拾理则那。	Why should there be nobody caring for these drums?
方今太平日无事，	The Empire is at peace, the government free.
柄任儒术崇丘轲。	Poets again are honored and Confucians and Mencians.
安能以此上论列？	Oh, how may this petition be carried to the throne?
愿借辩口如悬河。	It needs indeed an eloquent flow, like a cataract-
石鼓之歌止于此，	But, alas, my voice has broken, in my song of the stone drums,
呜呼吾意其蹉跎。	To a sound of supplication choked with its own tears.
渔翁夜傍西岩宿，	An old fisherman spent the night here, under the western cliff;
晓汲清湘燃楚烛。	He dipped up water from the pure Hsiang and made a bamboo fire;
烟销日出不见人，	And then, at sunrise, he went his way through the cloven mist,
欸乃一声山水绿。	With only the creak of his paddle left, in the greenness of mountain and river.
回看天际下中流，	I turn and see the waves moving as from heaven,
岩上无心云相逐。	And clouds above the cliffs coming idly, one by one.
汉皇重色思倾国，	China's Emperor, craving beauty that might shake an empire,
御宇多年求不得。	Was on the throne for many years, searching, never finding,
杨家有女初长成，	Till a little child of the Yang clan, hardly even grown,
养在深闺人未识。	Bred in an inner chamber, with no one knowing her,
天生丽质难自弃，	But with graces granted by heaven and not to be concealed,
一朝选在君王侧；	At last one day was chosen for the imperial household.
回眸一笑百媚生，	If she but turned her head and smiled, there were cast a hundred spells,
六宫粉黛无颜色。	And the powder and paint of the Six Palaces faded into nothing.
春寒赐浴华清池，	It was early spring. They bathed her in the FlowerPure Pool,
温泉水滑洗凝脂；	Which warmed and smoothed the creamy-tinted crystal of her skin,
侍儿扶起娇无力，	And, because of her languor, a maid was lifting her
始是新承恩泽时。	When first the Emperor noticed her and chose her for his bride.
云鬓花颜金步摇，	The cloud of her hair, petal of her cheek, gold ripples of her crown when she moved,
芙蓉帐暖度春宵；	Were sheltered on spring evenings by warm hibiscus curtains;
春宵苦短日高起，	But nights of spring were short and the sun arose too soon,
从此君王不早朝。	And the Emperor, from that time forth, forsook his early hearings
承欢侍宴无闲暇，	And lavished all his time on her with feasts and revelry,
春从春游夜专夜。	His mistress of the spring, his despot of the night.
后宫佳丽三千人，	There were other ladies in his court, three thousand of rare beauty,
三千宠爱在一身。	But his favors to three thousand were concentered in one body.
金星妆成娇侍夜，	By the time she was dressed in her Golden Chamber, it would be almost evening;
玉楼宴罢醉和春。	And when tables were cleared in the Tower of Jade, she would loiter, slow with wine.
姊妹弟兄皆列士，	Her sisters and her brothers all were given titles;
可怜光彩生门户；	And, because she so illumined and glorified her clan,
遂令天下父母心，	She brought to every father, every mother through the empire,
不重生男重生女。	Happiness when a girl was born rather than a boy.
骊宫高处入青云，	High rose Li Palace, entering blue clouds,
仙乐风飘处处闻；	And far and wide the breezes carried magical notes
缓歌慢舞凝丝竹，	Of soft song and slow dance, of string and bamboo music.
尽日君王看不足。	The Emperor's eyes could never gaze on her enough
渔阳鼙鼓动地来，	Till war-drums, booming from Yuyang, shocked the whole earth
惊破霓裳羽衣曲。	And broke the tunes of The Rainbow Skirt and the Feathered Coat.
九重城阙烟尘生，	The Forbidden City, the nine-tiered palace, loomed in the dust
千乘万骑西南行。	From thousands of horses and chariots headed southwest.
翠华摇摇行复止，	The imperial flag opened the way, now moving and now pausing
西出都门百余里。	But thirty miles from the capital, beyond the western gate,
六军不发无奈何？	The men of the army stopped, not one of them would stir
宛转蛾眉马前死。	Till under their horses' hoofs they might trample those moth-eyebrows.
花钿委地无人收，	Flowery hairpins fell to the ground, no one picked them up,
翠翘金雀玉搔头。	And a green and white jade hair-tassel and a yellow-gold hair-bird.
君王掩面救不得，	The Emperor could not save her, he could only cover his face.
回看血泪相和流。	And later when he turned to look, the place of blood and tears
黄埃散漫风萧索，	Was hidden in a yellow dust blown by a cold wind.
云栈萦纡登剑阁。	At the cleft of the Dagger-Tower Trail they crisscrossed through a cloud-line
峨嵋山下少人行，	Under Omei Mountain. The last few came.
旌旗无光日色薄。	Flags and banners lost their color in the fading sunlight.
蜀江水碧蜀山青，	But as waters of Shu are always green and its mountains always blue,
圣主朝朝暮暮情。	So changeless was His Majesty's love and deeper than the days.
行宫见月伤心色，	He stared at the desolate moon from his temporary palace.
夜雨闻铃肠断声。	He heard bell-notes in the evening rain, cutting at his breast.
天旋地转回龙驭，	And when heaven and earth resumed their round and the dragon car faced home,
到此踌躇不能去。	The Emperor clung to the spot and would not turn away
马嵬坡下泥土中，	From the soil along the Mawei slope, under which was buried
不见玉颜空死处。	That memory, that anguish. Where was her jade-white face?
君臣相顾尽沾衣，	Ruler and lords, when eyes would meet, wept upon their coats
东望都门信马归。	As they rode, with loose rein, slowly eastward, back to the capital.
归来池苑皆依旧，	The pools, the gardens, the palace, all were just as before,
太液芙蓉未央柳；	The Lake Taiye hibiscus, the Weiyang Palace willows;
芙蓉如面柳如眉，	But a petal was like her face and a willow-leaf her eyebrow
对此如何不泪垂？	And what could he do but cry whenever he looked at them?
春风桃李花开日，	Peach-trees and plum-trees blossomed, in the winds of spring;
秋雨梧桐叶落时。	Lakka-foliage fell to the ground, after autumn rains;
西宫南内多秋草，	The Western and Southern Palaces were littered with late grasses,
落叶满阶红不扫。	And the steps were mounded with red leaves that no one swept away.
梨园子弟白发新，	Her Pear-Garden Players became white-haired
椒房阿监青娥老。	And the eunuchs thin-eyebrowed in her Court of PepperTrees;
夕殿萤飞思悄然，	Over the throne flew fire-flies, while he brooded in the twilight.
孤灯挑尽未成眠。	He would lengthen the lamp-wick to its end and still could never sleep.
迟迟钟鼓初长夜，	Bell and drum would slowly toll the dragging night-hours
耿耿星河欲曙天。	And the River of Stars grow sharp in the sky, just before dawn,
鸳鸯瓦冷霜华重，	And the porcelain mandarin-ducks on the roof grow thick with morning frost
翡翠衾寒谁与共？	And his covers of kingfisher-blue feel lonelier and colder
悠悠生死别经年，	With the distance between life and death year after year;
魂魄不曾来入梦。	And yet no beloved spirit ever visited his dreams.
临邛道士鸿都客，	At Lingqiong lived a Taoist priest who was a guest of heaven,
能以精诚致魂魄；	Able to summon spirits by his concentrated mind.
为感君王辗转思，	And people were so moved by the Emperor's constant brooding
遂教方士殷勤觅。	That they besought the Taoist priest to see if he could find her.
排空驭气奔如电，	He opened his way in space and clove the ether like lightning,
升天入地求之遍；	Up to heaven, under the earth, looking everywhere.
上穷碧落下黄泉，	Above, he searched the Green Void, below, the Yellow Spring;
两处茫茫皆不见。	But he failed, in either place, to find the one he looked for.
忽闻海上有仙山，	And then he heard accounts of an enchanted isle at sea,
山在虚无缥缈间；	A part of the intangible and incorporeal world,
楼阁玲珑五云起，	With pavilions and fine towers in the five-coloured air,
其中绰约多仙子。	And of exquisite immortals moving to and fro,
中有一人字太真，	And of one among them-whom they called The Ever True
雪肤花貌参差是。	With a face of snow and flowers resembling hers he sought.
金阙西厢叩玉扃，	So he went to the West Hall's gate of gold and knocked at the jasper door
转教小玉报双成。	And asked a girl, called Morsel-of-Jade, to tell The Doubly-Perfect.
闻道汉家天子使，	And the lady, at news of an envoy from the Emperor of China,
九华帐里梦魂惊。	Was startled out of dreams in her nine-flowered, canopy.
揽衣推枕起徘徊，	She pushed aside her pillow, dressed, shook away sleep,
珠箔银屏迤逦开，	And opened the pearly shade and then the silver screen.
云鬓半偏新睡觉，	Her cloudy hair-dress hung on one side because of her great haste,
花冠不整下堂来。	And her flower-cap was loose when she came along the terrace,
风吹仙袂飘飘举，	While a light wind filled her cloak and fluttered with her motion
犹似霓裳羽衣舞；	As though she danced The Rainbow Skirt and the Feathered Coat.
玉容寂寞泪阑干，	And the tear-drops drifting down her sad white face
梨花一枝春带雨。	Were like a rain in spring on the blossom of the pear.
含情凝睇谢君王，	But love glowed deep within her eyes when she bade him thank her liege,
一别音容两渺茫。	Whose form and voice had been strange to her ever since their parting
昭阳殿里恩爱绝，	Since happiness had ended at the Court of the Bright Sun,
蓬莱宫中日月长。	And moons and dawns had become long in Fairy-Mountain Palace.
回头下望人寰处，	But when she turned her face and looked down toward the earth
不见长安见尘雾。	And tried to see the capital, there were only fog and dust.
唯将旧物表深情，	So she took out, with emotion, the pledges he had given
钿合金钗寄将去。	And, through his envoy, sent him back a shell box and gold hairpin,
钗留一股合一扇，	But kept one branch of the hairpin and one side of the box,
钗擘黄金合分钿；	Breaking the gold of the hairpin, breaking the shell of the box;
但教心似金钿坚，	"Our souls belong together," she said, " like this gold and this shell
天上人间会相见。	Somewhere, sometime, on earth or in heaven, we shall surely
临别殷勤重寄词，	And she sent him, by his messenger, a sentence reminding him
词中有誓两心知。	Of vows which had been known only to their two hearts:
七月七日长生殿，	"On the seventh day of the Seventh-month, in the Palace of Long Life,
夜半无人私语时。	We told each other secretly in the quiet midnight world
在天愿作比翼鸟，	That we wished to fly in heaven, two birds with the wings of one,
在地愿为连理枝。	And to grow together on the earth, two branches of one tree."
天长地久有时尽，	Earth endures, heaven endures; some time both shall end,
此恨绵绵无绝期。	While this unending sorrow goes on and on for ever.
浔言江头夜送客，	I was bidding a guest farewell, at night on the Xunyang River,
枫叶荻花秋瑟瑟。	Where maple-leaves and full-grown rushes rustled in the autumn.
主人下马客在船，	I, the host, had dismounted, my guest had boarded his boat,
举酒欲饮无管弦。	And we raised our cups and wished to drink-but, alas, there was no music.
醉不成欢惨将别，	For all we had drunk we felt no joy and were parting from each other,
别时茫茫江浸月。	When the river widened mysteriously toward the full moon
忽闻水上琵琶声，	We had heard a sudden sound, a guitar across the water.
主人忘归客不发。	Host forgot to turn back home, and guest to go his way.
寻声暗问弹者谁？	We followed where the melody led and asked the player's name.
琵琶声停欲语迟。	The sound broke off-then reluctantly she answered.
移船相近邀相见，	We moved our boat near hers, invited her to join us,
添酒回灯重开宴。	Summoned more wine and lanterns to recommence our banquet.
千呼万唤始出来，	Yet we called and urged a thousand times before she started toward us,
犹抱琵琶半遮面。	Still hiding half her face from us behind her guitar.
转轴拨弦三两声，	She turned the tuning-pegs and tested several strings;
未成曲调先有情。	We could feel what she was feeling, even before she played:
弦弦掩抑声声思，	Each string a meditation, each note a deep thought,
似诉平生不得志。	As if she were telling us the ache of her whole life.
低眉信手续续弹，	She knit her brows, flexed her fingers, then began her music,
说尽心中无限事。	Little by little letting her heart share everything with ours.
轻拢慢撚抹复挑，	She brushed the strings, twisted them slow, swept them, plucked them
初为霓裳后六么。	First the air of The Rainbow Skirt, then The Six Little Ones.
大弦嘈嘈如急雨，	The large strings hummed like rain,
小弦切切如私语。	The small strings whispered like a secret,
嘈嘈切切错杂弹，	Hummed, whispered-and then were intermingled
大珠小珠落玉盘。	Like a pouring of large and small pearls into a plate of jade.
间官莺语花底滑，	We heard an oriole, liquid, hidden among flowers.
幽咽泉流水下滩。	We heard a brook bitterly sob along a bank of sand.
水泉冷涩弦凝绝，	By the checking of its cold touch, the very string seemed broken
凝绝不通声渐歇。	As though it could not pass; and the notes, dying away
别有幽愁暗恨生，	Into a depth of sorrow and concealment of lament,
此时无声胜有声。	Told even more in silence than they had told in sound.
银瓶乍破水浆迸，	A silver vase abruptly broke with a gush of water,
铁骑突出刀鎗鸣。	And out leapt armored horses and weapons that clashed and smote
曲终收拨当心画，	And, before she laid her pick down, she ended with one stroke,
四弦一声如裂帛。	And all four strings made one sound, as of rending silk
东船西舫悄无言，	There was quiet in the east boat and quiet in the west,
唯见江心秋月白。	And we saw the white autumnal moon enter the river's heart.
沈吟放拨插弦中，	When she had slowly placed the pick back among the strings,
整顿衣裳起敛容。	She rose and smoothed her clothing and, formal, courteous,
自言本是京城女，	Told us how she had spent her girlhood at the capital,
家在虾蟆陵下住。	Living in her parents' house under the Mount of Toads,
十三学得琵琶成，	And had mastered the guitar at the age of thirteen,
名属教坊第一部。	With her name recorded first in the class-roll of musicians,
曲罢曾教善才服，	Her art the admiration even of experts,
妆成每被秋娘妒，	Her beauty the envy of all the leading dancers,
五陵年少争缠头，	How noble youths of Wuling had lavishly competed
一曲红绡不知数。	And numberless red rolls of silk been given for one song,
钿头银篦击节碎，	And silver combs with shell inlay been snapped by her rhythms,
血色罗裙翻酒污。	And skirts the color of blood been spoiled with stains of wine.
今年欢笑复明年，	Season after season, joy had followed joy,
秋月春风等闲度。	Autumn moons and spring winds had passed without her heeding,
弟走从军阿姨死，	Till first her brother left for the war, and then her aunt died,
暮去朝来颜色故。	And evenings went and evenings came, and her beauty faded
门前冷落车马稀，	With ever fewer chariots and horses at her door;
老大嫁作商人妇。	So that finally she gave herself as wife to a merchant
商人重利轻别离，	Who, prizing money first, careless how he left her,
前月浮梁买茶去。	Had gone, a month before, to Fuliang to buy tea.
去来江口守空船，	And she had been tending an empty boat at the river's mouth,
绕船月明江水寒。	No company but the bright moon and the cold water.
夜深忽梦少年事，	And sometimes in the deep of night she would dream of her triumphs
梦啼妆泪红阑干，	And be wakened from her dreams by the scalding of her tears.
我闻琵琶已叹息，	Her very first guitar-note had started me sighing;
又闻此语重唧唧。	Now, having heard her story, I was sadder still.
同是天涯沦落人，	"We are both unhappy -- to the sky's end.
相逢何必曾相识。	We meet. We understand. What does acquaintance matter?
我从去年辞帝京，	I came, a year ago, away from the capital
谪居卧病浔阳城。	And am now a sick exile here in Jiujiang
浔阳地僻无音乐，	And so remote is Jiujiang that I have heard no music,
终岁不闻丝竹声。	Neither string nor bamboo, for a whole year.
住近湓江地低湿，	My quarters, near the River Town, are low and damp,
黄芦苦竹绕宅生。	With bitter reeds and yellowed rushes all about the house.
其间旦暮闻何物，	And what is to be heard here, morning and evening?
杜鹃啼血猿哀鸣。	The bleeding cry of cuckoos, the whimpering of apes.
春江花朝秋月夜，	On flowery spring mornings and moonlit autumn nights
往往取酒还独倾。	I have often taken wine up and drunk it all alone,
岂无山歌与村笛？	Of course there are the mountain songs and the village pipes,
呕哑嘲哳难为听。	But they are crude and-strident, and grate on my ears.
今夜闻君琵琶语，	And tonight, when I heard you playing your guitar,
如听仙乐耳暂明。	I felt as if my hearing were bright with fairy music.
莫辞更坐弹一曲，	Do not leave us. Come, sit down. Play for us again.
为君翻作琵琶行。	And I will write a long song concerning a guitar."
感我此言良久立，	Moved by what I said, she stood there for a moment,
却坐促弦弦转急。	Then sat again to her strings-and they sounded even sadder,
凄凄不似向前声，	Although the tunes were different from those she had played before.
满座重闻皆掩泣。	The feasters, all listening, covered their faces.
座中泣下谁最多，	But who of them all was crying the most?
江州司马青衫湿。	This Jiujiang official. My blue sleeve was wet.
元和天子神武姿，	The Son of Heaven in Yuanhe times was martial as a god
彼何人哉轩与羲，	And might be likened only to the Emperors Xuan and Xi.
誓将上雪列圣耻，	He took an oath to reassert the glory of the empire,
坐法宫中朝四夷。	And tribute was brought to his palace from all four quarters.
淮西有贼五十载，	Western Huai for fifty years had been a bandit country,
封狼生貙貙生罴；	Wolves becoming lynxes, lynxes becoming bears.
不据山河据平地，	They assailed the mountains and rivers, rising from the plains,
长戈利矛日可麾。	With their long spears and sharp lances aimed at the Sun.
帝得圣相相曰度，	But the Emperor had a wise premier, by the name of Du,
贼斫不死神扶持。	Who, guarded by spirits against assassination,
腰悬相印作都统，	Hong at his girdle the seal of state, and accepted chief command,
阴风惨澹天王旗。	While these savage winds were harrying the flags of the Ruler of Heaven.
愬武古通作牙爪，	Generals Suo, Wu, Gu, and Tong became his paws and claws;
仪曹外郎载笔随。	Civil and military experts brought their writing brushes,
行军司马智且勇，	And his recording adviser was wise and resolute.
十四万众犹虎貔。	A hundred and forty thousand soldiers, fighting like lions and tigers,
入蔡缚贼献太庙。	Captured the bandit chieftains for the Imperial Temple.
功无与让恩不訾。	So complete a victory was a supreme event;
帝曰汝度功第一，	And the Emperor said: "To you, Du, should go the highest honor,
汝从事愈宜为辞。	And your secretary, Yu, should write a record of it."
愈拜稽首蹈且舞，	When Yu had bowed his head, he leapt and danced, saying:
金石刻画臣能为。	"Historical writings on stone and metal are my especial art;
古者世称大手笔，	And, since I know the finest brush-work of the old masters,
此事不系于职司。	My duty in this instance is more than merely official,
当仁自古有不让，	And I should be at fault if I modestly declined."
言讫屡颔天子颐。	The Emperor, on hearing this, nodded many times.
公退斋戒坐小阁，	And Yu retired and fasted and, in a narrow workroom,
濡染大笔何淋漓。	His great brush thick with ink as with drops of rain,
点窜尧典舜典字，	Chose characters like those in the Canons of Yao and Xun,
涂改清庙生民诗。	And a style as in the ancient poems Qingmiao and Shengmin.
文成破体书在纸，	And soon the description was ready, on a sheet of paper.
清晨再拜铺丹墀。	In the morning he laid it, with a bow, on the purple stairs.
表曰臣愈昧死上，	He memorialized the throne: "I, unworthy,
咏神圣功书之碑。	Have dared to record this exploit, for a monument."
碑高三丈字如斗，	The tablet was thirty feet high, the characters large as dippers;
负以灵鳌蟠以螭。	It was set on a sacred tortoise, its columns flanked with ragons.
句奇语重喻者少，	The phrases were strange with deep words that few could understand;
谗之天子言其私。	And jealousy entered and malice and reached the Emperor
长绳百尺拽碑倒。	So that a rope a hundred feet long pulled the tablet down
粗沙大石相磨治。	And coarse sand and small stones ground away its face.
公之斯文若元气，	But literature endures, like the universal spirit,
先时已入人肝脾。	And its breath becomes a part of the vitals of all men.
汤盘孔鼎有述作，	The Tang plate, the Confucian tripod, are eternal things,
今无其器存其辞。	Not because of their forms, but because of their inscriptions.
呜呼圣皇及圣相，	Sagacious is our sovereign and wise his minister,
相与烜赫流淳熙。	And high their successes and prosperous their reign;
公之斯文不示后，	But unless it be recorded by a writing such as this,
曷与三五相攀追？	How may they hope to rival the three and five good rulers?
愿书万本诵万过，	I wish I could write ten thousand copies to read ten thousand times,
口角流沫右手胝；	Till spittle ran from my lips and calluses hardened my fingers,
传之七十有二代，	And still could hand them down, through seventy-two generations,
以为封禅玉检明堂基。	As corner-stones for Rooms of Great Deeds on the Sacred Mountains.
汉家烟尘在东北，	The northeastern border of China was dark with smoke and dust.
汉将辞家破残贼。	To repel the savage invaders, our generals, leaving their families,
男儿本自重横行，	Strode forth together, looking as heroes should look;
天子非常赐颜色。	And having received from the Emperor his most gracious favor,
摐金伐鼓下榆关，	They marched to the beat of gong and drum through the Elm Pass.
旌旆逶迤碣石间。	They circled the Stone Tablet with a line of waving flags,
校尉羽书飞瀚海，	Till their captains over the Sea of Sand were twanging feathered orders.
单于猎火照狼山。	The Tartar chieftain's hunting-fires glimmered along Wolf Mountain,
山川萧条极边土，	And heights and rivers were cold and bleak there at the outer border;
胡骑凭陵杂风雨。	But soon the barbarians' horses were plunging through wind and rain.
战士军前半死生，	Half of our men at the front were killed, but the other half are living,
美人帐下犹歌舞。	And still at the camp beautiful girls dance for them and sing.
大漠穷秋塞草衰，	As autumn ends in the grey sand, with the grasses all withered,
孤城落日斗兵稀。	The few surviving watchers by the lonely wall at sunset,
身当恩遇常轻敌，	Serving in a good cause, hold life and the foeman lightly.
力尽关山未解围。	And yet, for all that they have done, Elm Pass is still unsafe.
铁衣远戍辛勤久，	Still at the front, iron armor is worn and battered thin,
玉筋应啼别离后。	And here at home food-sticks are made of jade tears.
少妇城南欲断肠，	Still in this southern city young wives' hearts are breaking,
征人蓟北空回首。	While soldiers at the northern border vainly look toward home.
边庭飘飖那可度？	The fury of the wind cuts our men's advance
绝域苍茫更何有？	In a place of death and blue void, with nothingness ahead.
杀气三时作阵云，	Three times a day a cloud of slaughter rises over the camp;
寒声一夜传刁斗。	And all night long the hour-drums shake their chilly booming,
相看白刃血纷纷，	Until white swords can be seen again, spattered with red blood.
死节从来岂顾勋。	When death becomes a duty, who stops to think of fame?
君不见沙场征战苦？	Yet in speaking of the rigors of warfare on the desert
至今犹忆李将军。	We name to this day Li, the great General, who lived long ago.
白日登山望烽火，	Through the bright day up the mountain, we scan the sky for a war-torch;
黄昏饮马傍交河。	At yellow dusk we water our horses in the boundary-river;
行人刁斗风沙暗，	And when the throb of watch-drums hangs in the sandy wind,
公主琵琶幽怨多。	We hear the guitar of the Chinese Princess telling her endless woe.
野云万里无城郭，	Three thousand miles without a town, nothing but camps,
雨雪纷纷连大漠。	Till the heavy sky joins the wide desert in snow.
胡雁哀鸣夜夜飞，	With their plaintive calls, barbarian wild-geese fly from night to night,
胡儿眼泪双双落。	And children of the Tartars have many tears to shed;
闻道玉门犹被遮，	But we hear that the Jade Pass is still under siege,
应将性命逐轻车。	And soon we stake our lives upon our light war chariots.
年年战骨埋荒外，	Each year we bury in the desert bones unnumbered,
空见葡萄入汉家。	Yet we only watch for grape-vines coming into China.
洛阳女儿对门居，	There's a girl from Loyang in the door across the street,
才可容颜十五余；	She looks fifteen, she may be a little older.
良人玉勒乘骢马，	While her master rides his rapid horse with jade bit an bridle,
侍女金盘脍鲤鱼。	Her handmaid brings her cod-fish in a golden plate.
画阁朱楼尽相望，	On her painted pavilions, facing red towers,
红桃绿柳垂檐向。	Cornices are pink and green with peach-bloom and with willow,
罗帷送上七香车，	Canopies of silk awn her seven-scented chair,
宝扇迎归九华帐。	And rare fans shade her, home to her nine-flowered curtains.
狂夫富贵在青春，	Her lord, with rank and wealth and in the bud of life,
意气骄奢剧季伦。	Exceeds in munificence the richest men of old.
自怜碧玉亲教舞，	He favors this girl of lowly birth, he has her taught to dance;
不惜珊瑚持与人。	And he gives away his coral-trees to almost anyone.
春窗曙灭九微火，	The wind of dawn just stirs when his nine soft lights go out,
九微片片飞花璅。	Those nine soft lights like petals in a flying chain of flowers.
戏罢曾无理曲时，	Between dances she has barely time for singing over the songs;
妆成祇是薰香坐。	No sooner is she dressed again than incense burns before her.
城中相识尽繁华，	Those she knows in town are only the rich and the lavish,
日夜经过赵李家。	And day and night she is visiting the hosts of the gayest mansions.
谁怜越女颜如玉？	Who notices the girl from Yue with a face of white jade,
贫贱江头自浣纱。	Humble, poor, alone, by the river, washing silk?
少年十五二十时，	When he was a youth of fifteen or twenty,
步行夺得胡马骑。	He chased a wild horse, he caught him and rode him,
射杀山中白额虎，	He shot the white-browed mountain tiger,
肯数邺下黄须儿。	He defied the yellow-bristled Horseman of Ye.
一身转战三千里，	Fighting single- handed for a thousand miles,
一剑曾当百万师。	With his naked dagger he could hold a multitude.
汉兵奋迅如霹雳，	Granted that the troops of China were as swift as heaven's thunder
虏骑崩腾畏蒺藜。	And that Tartar soldiers perished in pitfalls fanged with iron,
卫青不败由天幸，	General Wei Qing's victory was only a thing of chance.
李广无功缘数奇。	And General Li Guang's thwarted effort was his fate, not his fault.
自从弃置便衰朽，	Since this man's retirement he is looking old and worn:
世事蹉跎成白首。	Experience of the world has hastened his white hairs.
昔时飞箭无全目，	Though once his quick dart never missed the right eye of a bird,
今日垂杨生左肘。	Now knotted veins and tendons make his left arm like an osier.
路旁时卖故侯瓜，	He is sometimes at the road-side selling melons from his garden,
门前学种先生柳。	He is sometimes planting willows round his hermitage.
苍茫古木连穷巷，	His lonely lane is shut away by a dense grove,
寥落寒山对虚牖。	His vacant window looks upon the far cold mountains
誓令疏勒出飞泉，	But, if he prayed, the waters would come gushing for his men
不似颍川空使酒。	And never would he wanton his cause away with wine.
贺兰山下阵如云，	War-clouds are spreading, under the Helan Range;
羽檄交驰日夕闻。	Back and forth, day and night, go feathered messages;
节使三河募年少，	In the three River Provinces, the governors call young men
诏书五道出将军。	And five imperial edicts have summoned the old general.
试拂铁衣如雪色，	So he dusts his iron coat and shines it like snow-
聊持宝剑动星文。	Waves his dagger from its jade hilt in a dance of starry steel.
愿得燕弓射大将，	He is ready with his strong northern bow to smite the Tartar chieftain
耻令越甲鸣吾君。	That never a foreign war-dress may affront the Emperor.
莫嫌旧日云中守，	There once was an aged Prefect, forgotten and far away,
犹堪一战取功勋。	Who still could manage triumph with a single stroke.
渔舟逐水爱山春，	A fisherman is drifting, enjoying the spring mountains,
两岸桃花夹古津。	And the peach-trees on both banks lead him to an ancient source.
坐看红树不知远，	Watching the fresh-coloured trees, he never thinks of distance
行尽青溪不见人。	Till he comes to the end of the blue stream and suddenly- strange men!
山口潜行始隈隩，	It's a cave-with a mouth so narrow that he has to crawl through;
山开旷望旋平陆。	But then it opens wide again on a broad and level path --
遥看一处攒云树，	And far beyond he faces clouds crowning a reach of trees,
近入千家散花竹。	And thousands of houses shadowed round with flowers and bamboos.
樵客初传汉姓名，	Woodsmen tell him their names in the ancient speech of Han;
居人未改秦衣服。	And clothes of the Qin Dynasty are worn by all these people
居人共住武陵源，	Living on the uplands, above the Wuling River,
还从物外起田园。	On farms and in gardens that are like a world apart,
月明松下房栊静，	Their dwellings at peace under pines in the clear moon,
日出云中鸡犬喧。	Until sunrise fills the low sky with crowing and barking.
惊闻俗客争来集，	At news of a stranger the people all assemble,
竞引还家问都邑。	And each of them invites him home and asks him where he was born.
平明闾巷扫花开，	Alleys and paths are cleared for him of petals in the morning,
薄暮渔樵乘水入。	And fishermen and farmers bring him their loads at dusk.
初因避地去人间，	They had left the world long ago, they had come here seeking refuge;
及至成仙遂不还。	They have lived like angels ever since, blessedly far away,
峡里谁知有人事，	No one in the cave knowing anything outside,
世中遥望空云山。	Outsiders viewing only empty mountains and thick clouds.
不疑灵境难闻见，	The fisherman, unaware of his great good fortune,
尘心未尽思乡县。	Begins to think of country, of home, of worldly ties,
出洞无论隔山水，	Finds his way out of the cave again, past mountains and past rivers,
辞家终拟长游衍。	Intending some time to return, when he has told his kin.
自谓经过旧不迷，	He studies every step he takes, fixes it well in mind,
安知峰壑今来变。	And forgets that cliffs and peaks may vary their appearance.
当时只记入山深，	It is certain that to enter through the deepness of the mountain,
青溪几曲到云林？	A green river leads you, into a misty wood.
春来遍是桃花水，	But now, with spring-floods everywhere and floating peachpetals
不辨仙源何处寻？	Which is the way to go, to find that hidden source?
长相思，	"I am endlessly yearning
在长安。	To be in Changan.
络纬秋啼金井阑，	Insects hum of autumn by the gold brim of the well;
微霜凄凄簟色寒。	A thin frost glistens like little mirrors on my cold mat;
孤灯不明思欲绝，	The high lantern flickers; and. deeper grows my longing.
卷帷望月空长叹。	I lift the shade and, with many a sigh, gaze upon the moon,
美人如花隔云端，	Single as a flower, centered from the clouds.
上有青冥之长天，	Above, I see the blueness and deepness of sky.
下有渌水之波澜。	Below, I see the greenness and the restlessness of water.
天长路远魂飞苦，	Heaven is high, earth wide; bitter between them flies my sorrow.
梦魂不到关山难。	Can I dream through the gateway, over the mountain?
长相思，	Endless longing
摧心肝。	Breaks my heart."
日色已尽花含烟，	"The sun has set, and a mist is in the flowers;
月明欲素愁不眠。	And the moon grows very white and people sad and sleepless.
赵瑟初停凤凰柱，	A Zhao harp has just been laid mute on its phoenix holder,
蜀琴欲奏鸳鸯弦。	And a Shu lute begins to sound its mandarin-duck strings.
此曲有意无人传，	Since nobody can bear to you the burden of my song,
愿随春风寄燕然。	Would that it might follow the spring wind to Yanran Mountain.
忆君迢迢隔青天，	I think of you far away, beyond the blue sky,
昔日横波目，	And my eyes that once were sparkling
今成流泪泉。	Are now a well of tears.
不信妾肠断，	Oh, if ever you should doubt this aching of my heart,
归来看取明镜前。	Here in my bright mirror come back and look at me!"
金樽清酒斗十千，	Pure wine costs, for the golden cup, ten thousand coppers a flagon,
玉盘珍羞值万钱。	And a jade plate of dainty food calls for a million coins.
停杯投箸不能食，	I fling aside my food-sticks and cup, I cannot eat nor drink.
拔剑四顾心茫然。	I pull out my dagger, I peer four ways in vain.
欲渡黄河冰塞川，	I would cross the Yellow River, but ice chokes the ferry;
将登太行雪暗天。	I would climb the Taihang Mountains, but the sky is blind with snow.
闲来垂钓碧溪上，	I would sit and poise a fishing-pole, lazy by a brook
忽复乘舟梦日边。	But I suddenly dream of riding a boat, sailing for the sun.
行路难！	Journeying is hard,
行路难！	Journeying is hard.
多歧路，	There are many turnings
今安在？	Which am I to follow?
长风破浪会有时，	I will mount a long wind some day and break the heavy waves
直挂云帆济沧海。	And set my cloudy sail straight and bridge the deep, deep sea.
大道如青天，	The way is broad like the blue sky,
我独不得出。	But no way out before my eye.
羞逐长安社中儿，	I am ashamed to follow those who have no guts,
赤鸡白狗赌梨栗。	Gambling on fighting cocks and dogs for pears and nuts.
弹剑作歌奏苦声，	Feng would go homeward way, having no fish to eat;
曳裾王门不称情。	Zhou did not think to bow to noblemen was meet.
淮阴市井笑韩信，	General Han was mocked in the market-place;
汉朝公卿忌贾生。	The brilliant scholar Jia was banished in disgrace.
君不见，	Have you not heard of King of Yan in days gone by,
昔时燕家重郭隗，	Who venerated talents and built Terrace high
拥彗折节无嫌猜；	On which he offered gold to gifted men
剧辛乐毅感恩分，	And stooped low and swept the floor to welcome them?
输肝剖胆效英才。	Grateful, Ju Xin and Yue Yi came then
昭王白骨萦蔓草，	And served him heart and soul, both full of stratagem.
谁人更扫黄金台？	The King's bones were now buried,
行路难，	who would sweep the floor of the Gold Terrace any more?
归去来？	Hard is the way.
有耳莫洗颍川水，	Don't wash your ears on hearing something you dislike
有口莫食首阳蕨。	Nor die of hunger like famous hermits on the Pike!
含光混世贵无名，	Living without a fame among the motley crowd,
何用孤高比云月？	Why should one be as lofty as the moon or cloud?
吾观自古贤达人，	Of ancient talents who failed to retire, there's none
功成不退皆殒身。	But came to tragic ending after glory's won.
子胥既弃吴江上，	The head of General Wu was hung o'er city gate;
屈原终投湘水滨。	In the river was drowned the poet laureate.
陆机雄才岂自保？	The highly talented scholar wished in vain
李斯税驾苦不早。	To preserve his life to hear the cry of the crane.
华亭鹤唳讵可闻？	Minister Li regretted not to have retired
上蔡苍鹰何足道。	To hunt with falcon gray as he had long desired.
君不见，	Have you not heard of
吴中张翰称达生，	Zhang Han who resigned, carefree,
秋风忽忆江东行。	To go home to eat his perch with high glee?
且乐生前一杯酒，	Enjoy a cup of wine while you're alive!
何须身后千载名？	Do not care if your fame will not survive!
君不见黄河之水天上来，	See how the Yellow River's waters move out of heaven.
奔流到海不复回？	Entering the ocean, never to return.
君不见高堂明镜悲白发，	See how lovely locks in bright mirrors in high chambers,
朝如青丝暮成雪？	Though silken-black at morning, have changed by night to snow.
人生得意须尽欢，	Oh, let a man of spirit venture where he pleases
莫使金樽空对月，	And never tip his golden cup empty toward the moon!
天生我材必有用，	Since heaven gave the talent, let it be employed!
千金散尽还复来。	Spin a thousand pieces of silver, all of them come back!
烹羊宰牛且为乐，	Cook a sheep, kill a cow, whet the appetite,
会须一饮三百杯。	And make me, of three hundred bowls, one long drink!
岑夫子！	To the old master, Cen,
丹丘生！	And the young scholar, Danqiu,
将进酒；	Bring in the wine!
君莫停。	Let your cups never rest!
与君歌一曲，	Let me sing you a song!
请君为我侧耳听。	Let your ears attend!
钟鼓馔玉不足贵，	What are bell and drum, rare dishes and treasure?
但愿长醉不愿醒。	Let me be forever drunk and never come to reason!
古来圣贤皆寂寞，	Sober men of olden days and sages are forgotten,
惟有饮者留其名。	And only the great drinkers are famous for all time.
陈王昔时宴平乐，	Prince Chen paid at a banquet in the Palace of Perfection
斗酒十千恣欢谑。	Ten thousand coins for a cask of wine, with many a laugh and quip.
主人何为言少钱？	Why say, my host, that your money is gone?
径须沽取对君酌。	Go and buy wine and we'll drink it together!
五花马，	My flower-dappled horse,
千金裘。	My furs worth a thousand,
呼儿将出换美酒，	Hand them to the boy to exchange for good wine,
与尔同消万古愁。	And we'll drown away the woes of ten thousand generations!
车辚辚，	The war-chariots rattle,
马萧萧，	The war-horses whinny.
行人弓箭各在腰。	Each man of you has a bow and a quiver at his belt.
耶娘妻子走相送，	Father, mother, son, wife, stare at you going,
尘埃不见咸阳桥。	Till dust shall have buried the bridge beyond Changan.
牵衣顿足拦道哭，	They run with you, crying, they tug at your sleeves,
哭声直上干云霄。	And the sound of their sorrow goes up to the clouds;
道旁过者问行人，	And every time a bystander asks you a question,
行人但云点行频。	You can only say to him that you have to go.
或从十五北防河，	We remember others at fifteen sent north to guard the river
便至四十西营田。	And at forty sent west to cultivate the camp-farms.
去时里正与裹头，	The mayor wound their turbans for them when they started out.
归来头白还戍边。	With their turbaned hair white now, they are still at the border,
边亭流血成海水，	At the border where the blood of men spills like the sea
武皇开边意未已。	And still the heart of Emperor Wu is beating for war.
君不闻汉家山东二百州，	Do you know that, east of China's mountains, in two hundred districts
千村万落生荆杞？	And in thousands of villages, nothing grows but weeds,
纵有健妇把锄犁，	And though strong women have bent to the ploughing,
禾生陇亩无东西。	East and west the furrows all are broken down?
况复秦兵耐苦战，	Men of China are able to face the stiffest battle,
被驱不异犬与鸡。	But their officers drive them like chickens and dogs.
长者虽有问，	Whatever is asked of them,
役夫敢申恨；	Dare they complain?
且如今年冬，	For example, this winter
未休关西卒。	Held west of the gate,
县官急索租，	Challenged for taxes,
租税从何出？	How could they pay?
信知生男恶，	We have learned that to have a son is bad luck-
反是生女好；	It is very much better to have a daughter
生女犹得嫁比邻，	Who can marry and live in the house of a neighbor,
生男埋没随百草。	While under the sod we bury our boys.
君不见青海头，	Go to the Blue Sea, look along the shore
古来白骨无人收？	At all the old white bones forsaken
新鬼烦冤旧鬼哭，	New ghosts are wailing there now with the old,
天阴雨湿声啾啾。	Loudest in the dark sky of a stormy day.
三月三日天气新，	On the third day of the Third-month in the freshening weather
长安水边多丽人。	Many beauties take the air by the Changan waterfront,
态浓意远淑且真，	Receptive, aloof, sweet-mannered, sincere,
肌理细腻骨肉匀。	With soft fine skin and well-balanced bone.
绣罗衣裳照暮春，	Their embroidered silk robes in the spring sun are gleaming
蹙金孔雀银麒麟。	With a mass of golden peacocks and silver unicorns.
头上何所有？	And hanging far down from their temples
翠微盍叶垂鬓唇。	Are blue leaves of delicate kingfisher feathers.
背后何所见？	And following behind them
珠压腰衱稳称身。	Is a pearl-laden train, rhythmic with bearers.
就中云幕椒房亲，	Some of them are kindred to the Royal House
赐名大国虢与秦。	The titled Princesses Guo and Qin.
紫驼之峰出翠釜，	Red camel-humps are brought them from jade broilers,
水精之盘行素鳞。	And sweet fish is ordered them on crystal trays.
犀箸餍饫久未下，	Though their food-sticks of unicorn-horn are lifted languidly
鸾刀缕切空纷纶。	And the finely wrought phoenix carving-knife is very little used,
黄门飞鞚不动尘，	Fleet horses from the Yellow Gate, stirring no dust,
御厨络绎送八珍。	Bring precious dishes constantly from the imperial kitchen.
箫鼓哀吟感鬼神，	While a solemn sound of flutes and drums invokes gods and spirits,
宾从杂遝实要津。	Guests and courtiers gather, all of high rank;
后来鞍马何逡巡？	And finally, riding slow, a dignified horseman
当轩下马入锦茵。	Dismounts at the pavilion on an embroidered rug.
杨花雪落覆白苹，	In a snow of flying willow-cotton whitening the duckweed,
青鸟飞去衔红巾。	Bluebirds find their way with vermilion handkerchiefs
炙手可热势绝伦，	But power can be as hot as flame and burn people's fingers.
慎莫近前丞相嗔。	Be wary of the Premier, watch for his frown.
少陵野老吞生哭，	I am only an old woodsman, whispering a sob,
春日潜行曲江曲；	As I steal like a spring-shadow down the Winding River.
江头宫殿锁千门，	Since the palaces ashore are sealed by a thousand gates
细柳新蒲为谁绿？	Fine willows, new rushes, for whom are you so green?
忆昔霓旌下南苑；	I remember a cloud of flags that came from the South Garden,
苑中景物生颜色。	And ten thousand colors, heightening one another,
昭阳殿里第一人，	And the Kingdom's first Lady, from the Palace of the Bright Sun,
同辇随君侍君侧。	Attendant on the Emperor in his royal chariot,
辇前才人带弓箭，	And the horsemen before them, each with bow and arrows,
白马嚼啮黄金勒。	And the snowy horses, champing at bits of yellow gold,
翻身向天仰射云，	And an archer, breast skyward, shooting through the clouds
一箭正坠双飞翼。	And felling with one dart a pair of flying birds.
明眸皓齿今何在？	Where are those perfect eyes, where are those pearly teeth?
血污游魂归不得。	A blood-stained spirit has no home, has nowhere to return.
清渭东流剑阁深，	And clear Wei waters running east, through the cleft on Dagger- Tower Trail,
去住彼此无消息。	Carry neither there nor here any news of her.
人生有情泪沾臆，	People, compassionate, are wishing with tears
江水江花岂终极？	That she were as eternal as the river and the flowers.
黄昏胡骑尘满城，	Mounted Tartars, in the yellow twilight, cloud the town with dust.
欲往城南望城北。	I am fleeing south, but I linger-gazing northward toward the throne.
长安城头头白乌，	Along the wall of the Capital a white-headed crow
夜飞延秋门上呼；	Flies to the Gate where Autumn Enters and screams there in the night,
又向人家啄大屋，	Then turns again and pecks among the roofs of a tall mansion
屋底达官走避胡。	Whose lord, a mighty mandarin, has fled before the Tartars,
金鞭断折九马死，	With his golden whip now broken, his nine war-horses dead
骨肉不待同驰驱。	And his own flesh and bone scattered to the winds.
腰下宝玦青珊瑚，	There's a rare ring of green coral underneath the vest
问之不肯道姓名，	Of a Prince at a street-corner, bitterly sobbing,
但道困苦乞为奴。	Who has to give a false name to anyone who asks him-
已经百日窜荆棘，	Just a poor fellow, hoping for employment.
身上无有完肌肤。	A hundred days' hiding in grasses and thorns
高帝子孙尽隆准，	Show on his body from head to foot.
龙种自与常人殊。	But, since their first Emperor, all with hook noses,
豺狼在邑龙在野，	These Dragons look different from ordinary men.
王孙善保千金躯。	Wolves are in the palace now and Dragons are lost in the desert
不敢长语临交衢，	O Prince, be very careful of your most sacred person!
且为王孙立斯须。	I dare not address you long, here by the open road,
昨夜东风吹血腥，	Nor even to stand beside you for more than these few moments.
东来橐驼满旧都。	Last night with the spring-wind there came a smell of blood;
朔方健儿好身手，	The old Capital is full of camels from the east.
昔何勇锐今何愚？	Our northern warriors are sound enough of body and of hand
窃闻天子已传位，	Oh, why so brave in olden times and so craven now?
圣德北服南单于。	Our Emperor, we hear, has given his son the throne
花门剺面请雪耻，	And the southern border-chieftains are loyally inclined
慎勿出口他人狙。	And the Huamen and Limian tribes are gathering to avenge us.
哀哉王孙慎勿疏，	But still be careful-keep yourself well hidden from the dagger.
五陵佳气无时无。	Unhappy Prince, I beg you, be constantly on guard
夫子何为者，	O Master, how did the world repay
栖栖一代中。	Your life of long solicitude?
地犹鄹氏邑，	The Lords of Zou have misprized your land,
宅即鲁王宫。	And your home has been used as the palace of Lu.
叹凤嗟身否，	You foretold that when phoenixes vanished, your fortunes too would end,
伤麟怨道穷。	You knew that the captured unicorn would be a sign of the dose of your teaching.
今看两楹奠，	Can this sacrifice I watch, here between two temple pillars,
当与梦时同。	Be the selfsame omen of death you dreamed of long ago?
海上生明月，	The moon, grown full now over the sea,
天涯共此时。	Brightening the whole of heaven,
情人怨遥夜，	Brings to separated hearts
竟夕起相思。	The long thoughtfulness of night.
灭烛怜光满，	It is no darker though I blow out my candle.
披衣觉露滋。	It is no warmer though I put on my coat.
不堪盈手赠，	So I leave my message with the moon
还寝梦佳期。	And turn to my bed, hoping for dreams.
城阙辅三秦，	By this wall that surrounds the three Qin districts,
风烟望五津。	Through a mist that makes five rivers one,
与君离别意，	We bid each other a sad farewell,
同是宦游人。	We two officials going opposite ways.
海内存知己，	And yet, while China holds our friendship,
天涯若比邻。	And heaven remains our neighborhood,
无为在歧路，	Why should you linger at the fork of the road,
儿女共沾巾。	Wiping your eyes like a heart-broken child?
西路蝉声唱，	While the year sinks westward, I hear a cicada
南冠客思侵。	Bid me to be resolute here in my cell,
那堪玄鬓影，	Yet it needed the song of those black wings
来对白头吟。	To break a white-haired prisoner's heart.
露重飞难进，	His flight is heavy through the fog,
风多响易沉。	His pure voice drowns in the windy world.
无人信高洁，	Who knows if he be singing still?
谁为表予心。	Who listens any more to me?
独有宦游人，	Only to wanderers can come
偏惊物候新。	Ever new the shock of beauty,
云霞出海曙，	Of white cloud and red cloud dawning from the sea,
梅柳渡江春。	Of spring in the wild-plum and river-willow.
淑气催黄鸟，	I watch a yellow oriole dart in the warm air,
晴光转绿苹。	And a green water- plant reflected by the sun.
忽闻歌古调，	Suddenly an old song fills
归思欲沾巾。	My heart with home, my eyes with tears.
闻道黄龙戍，	Against the City of the Yellow Dragon
频年不解兵。	Our troops were sent long years ago,
可怜闺里月，	And girls here watch the same melancholy moon
长在汉家营。	That lights our Chinese warriors
少妇今春意，	And young wives dream a dream of spring,
良人昨夜情。	That last night their heroic husbands,
谁能将旗鼓，	In a great attack, with flags and drums,
一为取龙城？	Captured the City of the Yellow Dragon.
阳月南飞雁，	They say that wild-geese, flying southward,
传闻至此回，	Here turn back, this very month.
我行殊未已，	Shall my own southward journey
何日复归来？	Ever be retraced, I wonder?
江静潮初落，	The river is pausing at ebb-tide,
林昏瘴不开。	And the woods are thick with clinging mist
明朝望乡处，	But tomorrow morning, over the mountain,
应见陇头梅。	Dawn will be white with the plum-trees of home.
客路青山外，	Under blue mountains we wound our way,
行舟绿水前。	My boat and I, along green water;
潮平两岸阔，	Until the banks at low tide widened,
风正一帆悬。	With no wind stirring my lone sail.
海日生残夜，	Night now yields to a sea of sun,
江春入旧年。	And the old year melts in freshets.
乡书何处达？	At last I can send my messengers
归雁洛阳边。	Wild-geese, homing to Loyang.
清晨入古寺，	In the pure morning, near the old temple,
初日照高林。	Where early sunlight points the tree-tops,
曲径通幽处，	My path has wound, through a sheltered hollow
禅房花木深。	Of boughs and flowers, to a Buddhist retreat.
山光悦鸟性，	Here birds are alive with mountain-light,
潭影空人心。	And the mind of man touches peace in a pool,
万籁此俱寂，	And a thousand sounds are quieted
惟余钟磬音。	By the breathing of a temple-bell.
联步趋丹陛，	Together we officials climbed vermilion steps,
分曹限紫微。	To be parted by the purple walls.
晓随天仗入，	Our procession, which entered the palace at dawn,
暮惹御香归。	Leaves fragrant now at dusk with imperial incense.
白发悲花落，	Grey heads may grieve for a fallen flower,
青云羡鸟飞。	Or blue clouds envy a lilting bird;
圣朝无阙事，	But this reign is of heaven, nothing goes wrong,
自觉谏书稀。	There have been almost no petitions.
吾爱孟夫子，	Master, I hail you from my heart,
风流天下闻。	And your fame arisen to the skies.
红颜弃轩冕，	Renouncing in ruddy youth the importance of hat and chariot,
白首卧松云。	You chose pine-trees and clouds; and now, white haired,
醉月频中圣，	Drunk with the moon, a sage of dreams,
迷花不事君。	Flower- bewitched, you are deaf to the Emperor.
高山安可仰？	High mountain, how I long to reach you,
徒此挹清芬。	Breathing your sweetness even here!
渡远荆门外，	Sailing far off from Jingmen Ferry,
来从楚国游。	Soon you will be with people in the south,
山随平野尽，	Where the mountains end and the plains begin
江入大荒流。	And the river winds through wilderness.
月下飞天镜，	The moon is lifted like a mirror,
云生结海楼。	Sea-clouds gleam like palaces,
仍怜故乡水，	And the water has brought you a touch of home
万里送行舟。	To draw your boat three hundred miles.
青山横北郭，	With a blue line of mountains north of the wall,
白水绕东城。	And east of the city a white curve of water,
此地一为别，	Here you must leave me and drift away
孤蓬万里征。	Like a loosened water-plant hundreds of miles.
浮云游子意，	I shall think of you in a floating cloud;
落日故人情。	So in the sunset think of me.
挥手自兹去，	We wave our hands to say good-bye,
萧萧班马鸣。	And my horse is neighing again and again.
蜀僧抱绿绮，	The monk from Shu with his green silk lute-case,
西下峨眉峰；	Walking west down Omei Mountain,
为我一挥手，	Has brought me by one touch of the strings
如听万壑松。	The breath of pines in a thousand valleys.
客心洗流水，	I hear him in the cleansing brook,
余响入霜钟。	I hear him in the icy bells;
不觉碧山暮，	And I feel no change though the mountain darken
秋云暗几重？	And cloudy autumn heaps the sky.
牛渚西江夜，	This night to the west of the river-brim
青天无片云；	There is not one cloud in the whole blue sky,
登舟望秋月，	As I watch from my deck the autumn moon,
空忆谢将军。	Vainly remembering old General Xie.
余亦能高咏，	I have poems; I can read;
斯人不可闻。	He heard others, but not mine.
明朝挂帆席，	Tomorrow I shall hoist my sail,
枫叶落纷纷。	With fallen maple-leaves behind me.
今夜鄜州月，	Far off in Fuzhou she is watching the moonlight,
闺中只独看。	Watching it alone from the window of her chamber-
遥怜小儿女，	For our boy and girl, poor little babes,
未解忆长安。	Are too young to know where the Capital is.
香雾云鬟湿，	Her cloudy hair is sweet with mist,
清辉玉臂寒。	Her jade-white shoulder is cold in the moon.
何时倚虚幌，	When shall we lie again, with no more tears,
双照泪痕乾。	Watching this bright light on our screen?
国破山河在，	Though a country be sundered, hills and rivers endure;
城春草木深。	And spring comes green again to trees and grasses
感时花溅泪，	Where petals have been shed like tears
恨别鸟惊心。	And lonely birds have sung their grief.
烽火连三月，	After the war-fires of three months,
家书抵万金。	One message from home is worth a ton of gold.
白头搔更短，	I stroke my white hair. It has grown too thin
浑欲不胜簪。	To hold the hairpins any more.
花隐掖垣暮，	Flowers are shadowed, the palace darkens,
啾啾栖鸟过。	Birds twitter by for a place to perch;
星临万户动，	Heaven's ten thousand windows are twinkling,
月傍九霄多。	And nine cloud-terraces are gleaming in the moonlight.
不寝听金钥，	While I wait for the golden lock to turn,
因风想玉珂。	I hear jade pendants tinkling in the wind.
明朝有封事，	I have a petition to present in the morning,
数问夜如何。	All night I ask what time it is.
至今残破胆，	This is the road by which I fled,
应有未招魂。	When the rebels had reached the west end of the city;
近得归京邑，	And terror, ever since, has clutched at my vitals
移官岂至尊。	Lest some of my soul should never return.
无才日衰老，	The court has come back now, filling the capital;
驻马望千门。	But the Emperor sends me away again.
戍鼓断人行，	A wanderer hears drums portending battle.
秋边一雁声。	By the first call of autumn from a wild goose at the border,
露从今夜白，	He knows that the dews tonight will be frost.
月是故乡明。	How much brighter the moonlight is at home!
有弟皆分散，	O my brothers, lost and scattered,
无家问死生。	What is life to me without you?
寄书长不达，	Yet if missives in time of peace go wrong
况乃未休兵。	What can I hope for during war?
凉风起天末，	A cold wind blows from the far sky.
君子意如何。	What are you thinking of, old friend?
鸿雁几时到，	The wild geese never answer me.
江湖秋水多。	Rivers and lakes are flooded with rain.
文章憎命达，	A poet should beware of prosperity,
魑魅喜人过。	Yet demons can haunt a wanderer.
应共冤魂语，	Ask an unhappy ghost, throw poems to him
投诗赠汨罗。	Where he drowned himself in the Milo River.
远送从此别，	This is where your comrade must leave you,
青山空复情。	Turning at the foot of these purple mountains.
几时杯重把，	When shall we lift our cups again, I wonder,
昨夜月同行。	As we did last night and walk in the moon?
列郡讴歌惜，	The region is murmuring farewell
三朝出入荣。	To one who was honored through three reigns;
将村独归处，	And back I go now to my river-village,
寂寞养残生。	Into the final solitude.
他乡复行役，	Having to travel back now from this far place,
驻马别孤坟。	I dismount beside your lonely tomb.
近泪无乾土，	The ground where I stand is wet with my tears;
低空有断云。	The sky is dark with broken clouds.
对棋陪谢傅，	I who played chess with the great Premier
把剑觅徐君。	Am bringing to my lord the dagger he desired.
唯见林花落，	But I find only petals falling down,
莺啼送客闻。	I hear only linnets answering.
细草微风岸，	A light wind is rippling at the grassy shore.
危樯独夜舟。	Through the night, to my motionless tall mast,
星垂平野阔，	The stars lean down from open space,
月涌大江流。	And the moon comes running up the river.
名岂文章著，	If only my art might bring me fame
官应老病休。	And free my sick old age from office!
飘飘何所似，	Flitting, flitting, what am I like
天地一沙鸥。	But a sand-snipe in the wide, wide world!
昔闻洞庭水，	I had always heard of Lake Dongting
今上岳阳楼。	And now at last I have climbed to this tower.
吴楚东南坼，	With Wu country to the east of me and Chu to the south,
乾坤日夜浮。	I can see heaven and earth endlessly floating.
亲朋无一字，	But no word has reached me from kin or friends.
老病有孤舟。	I am old and sick and alone with my boat.
戎马关山北，	North of this wall there are wars and mountains
凭轩涕泗流。	And here by the rail how can I help crying?
寒山转苍翠，	The mountains are cold and blue now
秋水日潺湲。	And the autumn waters have run all day.
倚杖柴门外，	By my thatch door, leaning on my staff,
临风听暮蝉。	I listen to cicadas in the evening wind.
渡头余落日，	Sunset lingers at the ferry,
墟里上孤烟。	Supper-smoke floats up from the houses.
复值接舆醉，	Oh, when shall I pledge the great Hermit again
狂歌五柳前。	And sing a wild poem at Five Willows?
空山新雨后，	After rain the empty mountain
天气晚来秋。	Stands autumnal in the evening,
明月松间照，	Moonlight in its groves of pine,
清泉石上流。	Stones of crystal in its brooks.
竹喧归浣女，	Bamboos whisper of washer-girls bound home,
莲动下渔舟。	Lotus-leaves yield before a fisher-boat
随意春芳歇，	And what does it matter that springtime has gone,
王孙自可留。	While you are here, O Prince of Friends?
清川带长薄，	The limpid river, past its bushes
车马去闲闲。	Running slowly as my chariot,
流水如有意，	Becomes a fellow voyager
暮禽相与还。	Returning home with the evening birds.
荒城临古渡，	A ruined city-wall overtops an old ferry,
落日满秋山。	Autumn sunset floods the peaks.
迢递嵩高下，	Far away, beside Mount Song,
归来且闭关。	I shall close my door and be at peace.
太乙近天都，	Its massive height near the City of Heaven
连山接海隅。	Joins a thousand mountains to the corner of the sea.
白云回望合，	Clouds, when I look back, close behind me,
青霭入看无。	Mists, when I enter them, are gone.
分野中峰变，	A central peak divides the wilds
阴晴众壑殊。	And weather into many valleys.
欲投人处宿，	Needing a place to spend the night,
隔水问樵夫。	I call to a wood-cutter over the river.
晚年惟好静，	As the years go by, give me but peace,
万事不关心。	Freedom from ten thousand matters.
自顾无长策，	I ask myself and always answer:
空知返旧林。	What can be better than coming home?
松风吹解带，	A wind from the pine-trees blows my sash,
山月照弹琴。	And my lute is bright with the mountain moon.
君问穷通理，	You ask me about good and evil fortune?.
渔歌入浦深。	Hark, on the lake there's a fisherman singing!
不知香积寺，	Not knowing the way to the Temple of Heaped Fragrance,
数里入云峰。	Under miles of mountain-cloud I have wandered
古木无人径，	Through ancient woods without a human track;
深山何处钟。	But now on the height I hear a bell.
泉声咽危石，	A rillet sings over winding rocks,
日色冷青松。	The sun is tempered by green pines.
薄暮空潭曲，	And at twilight, close to an emptying pool,
安禅制毒龙。	Thought can conquer the Passion-Dragon.
万壑树参天，	From ten thousand valleys the trees touch heaven;
千山响杜鹃。	On a thousand peaks cuckoos are calling;
山中一夜雨，	And, after a night of mountain rain,
树杪百重泉。	From each summit come hundreds of silken cascades.
汉女输橦布，	If girls are asked in tribute the fibre they weave,
巴人讼芋田。	Or farmers quarrel over taro fields,
文翁翻教授，	Preside as wisely as Wenweng did.
不敢倚先贤。	Is fame to be only for the ancients?
楚塞三湘接，	With its three southern branches reaching the Chu border,
荆门九派通。	And its nine streams touching the gateway of Jing,
江流天地外，	This river runs beyond heaven and earth,
山色有无中。	Where the color of mountains both is and is not.
郡邑浮前浦，	The dwellings of men seem floating along
波澜动远空。	On ripples of the distant sky
襄阳好风日，	These beautiful days here in Xiangyang
留醉与山翁。	Make drunken my old mountain heart!
中岁颇好道，	My heart in middle age found the Way.
晚家南山陲。	And I came to dwell at the foot of this mountain.
兴来美独往，	When the spirit moves, I wander alone
胜事空自知。	Amid beauty that is all for me.
行到水穷处，	I will walk till the water checks my path,
坐看云起时。	Then sit and watch the rising clouds
偶然值林叟，	And some day meet an old wood-cutter
谈笑无还期。	And talk and laugh and never return.
八月湖水平，	Here in the Eighth-month the waters of the lake
涵虚混太清。	Are of a single air with heaven,
气蒸云梦泽，	And a mist from the Yun and Meng valleys
波撼岳阳城。	Has beleaguered the city of Youzhou.
欲济无舟楫，	I should like to cross, but I can find no boat.
端居耻圣明。	How ashamed I am to be idler than you statesmen,
坐观垂钓者，	As I sit here and watch a fisherman casting
空有羡鱼情。	And emptily envy him his catch.
人事有代谢，	While worldly matters take their turn,
往来成古今。	Ancient, modern, to and fro,
江山留胜迹，	Rivers and mountains are changeless in their glory
我辈复登临。	And still to be witnessed from this trail.
水落鱼梁浅，	Where a fisher-boat dips by a waterfall,
天寒梦泽深。	Where the air grows colder, deep in the valley,
羊公碑字在，	The monument of Yang remains;
读罢泪沾襟。	And we have wept, reading the words.
林卧愁春尽，	In my bed among the woods, grieving that spring must end,
开轩览物华。	I lifted up the curtain on a pathway of flowers,
忽逢青鸟使，	And a flashing bluebird bade me come
邀入赤松家。	To the dwelling-place of the Red Pine Genie.
丹灶初开火，	What a flame for his golden crucible
仙桃正发花。	Peach-trees magical with buds !
童颜若可驻，	And for holding boyhood in his face,
何惜醉流霞。	The rosy-flowing wine of clouds!
北阙休上书，	I petition no more at the north palace-gate.
南山归敝庐。	To this tumble-down hut on Zhongnan Mountain
不才明主弃，	I was banished for my blunders, by a wise ruler.
多病故人疏。	I have been sick so long I see none of my friends.
白发催年老，	My white hairs hasten my decline,
青阳逼岁除。	Like pale beams ending the old year.
永怀愁不寐，	Therefore I lie awake and ponder
松月夜窗墟。	On the pine-shadowed moonlight in my empty window.
故人具鸡黍，	Preparing me chicken and rice, old friend,
邀我至田家。	You entertain me at your farm.
绿树村边合，	We watch the green trees that circle your village
青山郭外斜。	And the pale blue of outlying mountains.
开轩面场圃，	We open your window over garden and field,
把酒话桑麻。	To talk mulberry and hemp with our cups in our hands.
待到重阳日，	Wait till the Mountain Holiday
还来就菊花。	I am coming again in chrysanthemum time.
一丘尝欲卧，	How gladly I would seek a mountain
三径苦无资。	If I had enough means to live as a recluse!
北土非吾愿，	For I turn at last from serving the State
东林怀我师。	To the Eastern Woods Temple and to you, my master.
黄金燃桂尽，	Like ashes of gold in a cinnamon-flame,
壮志逐年衰。	My youthful desires have been burnt with the years-
日夕凉风至，	And tonight in the chilling sunset-wind
闻蝉但益悲。	A cicada, singing, weighs on my heart.
山暝听猿愁，	With monkeys whimpering on the shadowy mountain,
沧江急夜流。	And the river rushing through the night,
风鸣两岸叶，	And a wind in the leaves along both banks,
月照一孤舟。	And the moon athwart my solitary sail,
建德非吾土，	I, a stranger in this inland district,
维扬忆旧游。	Homesick for my Yangzhou friends,
还将两行泪，	Send eastward two long streams of tears
遥寄海西头。	To find the nearest touch of the sea.
寂寂竟何待，	Slow and reluctant, I have waited
朝朝空自归。	Day after day, till now I must go.
欲寻芳草去，	How sweet the road-side flowers might be
惜与故人违。	If they did not mean good-bye, old friend.
当路谁相假，	The Lords of the Realm are harsh to us
知音世所稀。	And men of affairs are not our kind.
祗应守寂寞，	I will turn back home, I will say no more,
还掩故园扉。	I will close the gate of my old garden.
木落雁南渡，	South go the wild-geese, for leaves are now falling,
北风江上寒。	And the water is cold with a wind from the north.
我家襄水曲，	I remember my home; but the Xiang River's curves
遥隔楚云端。	Are walled by the clouds of this southern country.
乡泪客中尽，	I go forward. I weep till my tears are spent.
孤帆天际看。	I see a sail in the far sky.
迷津欲有问，	Where is the ferry? Will somebody tell me?
平海夕漫漫。	It's growing rough. It's growing dark.
古台摇落后，	ON THE TERRACE OF GENERAL WU
秋日望乡心。	So autumn breaks my homesick heart.
野寺人来少，	Few pilgrims venture climbing to a temple so wild,
云峰水隔深。	Up from the lake, in the mountain clouds.
夕阳依旧垒，	Sunset clings in the old defenses,
寒磬满空林。	A stone gong shivers through the empty woods.
惆怅南朝事，	Of the Southern Dynasty, what remains?
长江独至今。	Nothing but the great River.
流落征南将，	Sad wanderer, once you conquered the South,
曾驱十万师。	Commanding a hundred thousand men;
罢归无旧业，	Today, dismissed and dispossessed,
老去恋明时。	In your old age you remember glory.
独立三边静，	Once, when you stood, three borders were still;
轻生一剑知。	Your dagger was the scale of life.
茫茫江汉上，	Now, watching the great rivers, the Jiang and the Han,
日暮复何之。	On their ways in the evening, where do you go?
望君烟水阔，	Toward a mist upon the water
挥手泪沾巾。	Still I wave my hand and sob,
飞鸟没何处？	For the flying bird is lost in space
青山空向人。	Beyond a desolate green mountain.
长江一帆远，	But now the long river, the far lone sail,
落日五湖春。	five lakes, gleam like spring in the sunset;
谁见汀洲上，	And down an island white with duckweed
相思愁白苹？	Comes the quiet of communion.
一路经行处，	Walking along a little path,
莓苔见履痕。	I find a footprint on the moss,
白云依静渚，	A while cloud low on the quiet lake,
春草闭闲门。	Grasses that sweeten an idle door,
过雨看松色，	A pine grown greener with the rain,
随山到水源。	A brook that comes from a mountain source
溪花与禅意，	And, mingling with Truth among the flowers,
相对亦忘言。	I have forgotten what to say.
乡心新岁切，	New Year's only deepens my longing,
天畔独潸然。	Adds to the lonely tears of an exile
老至居人下，	Who, growing old and still in harness,
春归在客先。	Is left here by the homing spring.
岭猿同旦暮，	Monkeys come down from the mountains to haunt me.
江柳共风烟。	I bend like a willow, when it rains on the river.
已似长沙傅，	I think of Jia Yi, who taught here and died here-
从今又几年。	And I wonder what my term shall be.
上国随缘住，	You were foreordained to find the source.
来途若梦行。	Now, tracing your way as in a dream
浮天沧海远，	There where the sea floats up the sky,
去世法舟轻。	You wane from the world in your fragile boat.
水月通禅寂，	The water and the moon are as calm as your faith,
鱼龙听梵声。	Fishes and dragons follow your chanting,
惟怜一灯影，	And the eye still watches beyond the horizon
万里眼中明。	The holy light of your single lantern.
泉壑带茅茨，	At a little grass-hut in the valley of the river,
云霞生薜帷。	Where a cloud seems born from a viney wall,
竹怜新雨后，	You will love the bamboos new with rain,
山爱夕阳时。	And mountains tender in the sunset.
闲鹭栖常早，	Cranes drift early here to rest
秋花落更迟。	And autumn flowers are slow to fade.
家童扫萝径，	I have bidden my pupil to sweep the grassy path
昨与故人期。	For the coming of my friend.
江汉曾为客，	We used to be companions on the Jiang and the Han,
相逢每醉还。	And as often as we met, we were likely to be tipsy.
浮云一别后，	Since we left one another, floating apart like clouds,
流水十年间。	Ten years have run like water-till at last we join again.
欢笑情如旧，	And we talk again and laugh again just as in earlier days,
萧疏鬓已斑。	Except that the hair on our heads is tinged now with grey.
何因北归去？	Why not come along, then, all of us together,
淮上对秋山。	And face the autumn mountains and sail along the Huai?
楚江微雨里，	Is it raining on the river all the way to Chu?
建业暮钟时。	The evening bell comes to us from Nanjing.
漠漠帆来重，	Your wet sail drags and is loath to be going
冥冥鸟去迟。	And shadowy birds are flying slow.
海门深不见，	We cannot see the deep ocean-gate
浦树远含滋。	Only the boughs at Pukou, newly dripping.
相送情无限，	Likewise, because of our great love,
沾襟比散丝。	There are threads of water on our faces.
长簟迎风早，	While a cold wind is creeping under my mat,
空城澹月华。	And the city's naked wall grows pale with the autumn moon,
星河秋一雁，	I see a lone wild-goose crossing the River of Stars,
砧杵夜千家。	And I hear, on stone in the night, thousands of washing mallets.
节候看应晚，	But, instead of wishing the season, as it goes,
心期卧亦赊。	To bear me also far away,
向来吟秀句，	I have found your poem so beautiful
不觉已鸣鸦。	That I forget the homing birds.
道由白云尽，	On a road outreaching the white clouds,
春与青溪长。	By a spring outrunning the bluest river,
时有落花至，	Petals come drifting on the wind
远隋流水香。	And the brook is sweet with them all the way.
闲门向山路，	My quiet gate is a mountain-trail,
深柳读书堂。	And the willow-trees about my cottage
幽映每白日，	Sift on my sleeve, through the shadowy noon,
清辉照衣裳。	Distillations of the sun.
天秋月又满，	While the autumn moon is pouring full
城阙夜千重。	On a thousand night-levels among towns and villages,
还作江南会，	There meet by chance, south of the river,
翻疑梦里逢。	Dreaming doubters of a dream.
风枝惊暗鹊，	In the trees a wind has startled the birds,
露草覆寒虫。	And insects cower from cold in the grass;
羁旅长堪醉，	But wayfarers at least have wine
相留畏晓钟。	And nothing to fear -- till the morning bell.
故关衰草遍，	By my old gate, among yellow grasses,
离别正堪悲。	Still we linger, sick at heart.
路出寒云外，	The way you must follow through cold clouds
人归暮雪时。	Will lead you this evening into snow.
少孤为客早，	Your father died; you left home young;
多难识君迟。	Nobody knew of your misfortunes.
掩泪空相向，	We cry, we say nothing. What can I wish you,
风尘何处期。	In this blowing wintry world?
十年离乱后，	After these ten torn wearisome years
长大一相逢。	We have met again. We were both so changed
问姓惊初见，	That hearing first your surname, I thought you a stranger
称名忆旧容。	Then hearing your given name, I remembered your young face.
别来沧海事，	All that has happened with the tides
语罢暮天钟。	We have told and told till the evening bell.
明日巴陵道，	Tomorrow you journey to Youzhou,
秋山又几重。	Leaving autumn between us, peak after peak.
故人江海别，	Long divided by river and sea,
几度隔山川。	For years we two have failed to meet
乍见翻疑梦，	And suddenly to find you seems like a dream.
相悲各问年。	With a catch in the throat, we ask how old we are.
孤灯寒照雨，	Our single lamp shines, through cold and wet,
深竹暗浮烟。	On a bamboo- thicket sheathed in rain;
更有明朝恨，	But forgetting the sadness that will come with tomorrow,
离杯惜共传。	Let us share the comfort of this farewell wine.
静夜四无邻，	With no other neighbor but the quiet night,
荒居旧业贫。	Here I live in the same old cottage;
雨中黄叶树，	And as raindrops brighten yellow leaves,
灯下白头人。	The lamp illumines my white head.
以我独沉久，	Out of the world these many years,
愧君相访频。	I am ashamed to receive you here.
平生自有分，	But you cannot come too often,
况是蔡家亲。	More than brother, lifelong friend.
世乱同南去，	In dangerous times we two came south;
时清独北还。	Now you go north in safety, without me.
他乡生白发，	But remember my head growing white among strangers,
旧国见青山。	When you look on the blue of the mountains of home.
晓月过残垒，	The moon goes down behind a ruined fort,
繁星宿故关。	Leaving star-clusters above an old gate.
寒禽与衰草，	There are shivering birds and withering grasses,
处处伴愁颜。	Whichever way I turn my face.
天地英雄气，	Even in this world the spirit of a hero
千秋尚凛然。	Lives and reigns for thousands of years.
势分三足鼎，	You were the firmest of the pot's three legs;
业复五铢钱。	It was you who maintained the honor of the currency;
得相能开国，	You chose a great premier to magnify your kingdom.
生儿不象贤。	And yet you had a son so little like his father
凄凉蜀故妓，	That girls of your country were taken captive
来舞魏宫前。	To dance in the palace of the King of Wei.
前年伐月支，	Last year you went with your troops to Tibet;
城下没全师。	And when your men had vanished beyond the city wall,
蕃汉断消息，	News was cut off between the two worlds
死生长别离。	As between the living and the dead.
无人收废帐，	No one has come upon a faithful horse guarding
归马识残旗。	A crumpled tent or torn flag, or any trace of you.
欲祭疑君在，	If only I knew, I might serve you in the temple,
天涯哭此时。	Instead of these tears toward the far sky.
离离原上草，	Boundless grasses over the plain
一岁一枯荣。	Come and go with every season;
野火烧不尽，	Wildfire never quite consumes them
春风吹又生。	They are tall once more in the spring wind.
远芳侵古道，	Sweet they press on the old high- road
晴翠接荒城。	And reach the crumbling city-gate.
又送王孙去，	O Prince of Friends, you are gone again.
萋萋满别情。	I hear them sighing after you.
旅馆无良伴，	Solitary at the tavern,
凝情自悄然。	I am shut in with loneliness and grief.
寒灯思旧事，	Under the cold lamp, I brood on the past;
断雁警愁眠。	I am kept awake by a lost wild goose.
远梦归侵晓，	Roused at dawn from a misty dream,
家书到隔年。	I read, a year late, news from home
沧江好烟月，	And I remember the moon like smoke on the river
门系钓鱼船。	And a fisher-boat moored there, under my door.
红叶晚萧萧，	Red leaves are fluttering down the twilight
长亭酒一瓢。	Past this arbor where I take my wine;
残云归太华，	Cloud-rifts are blowing toward Great Flower Mountain,
疏雨过中条。	And a shower is crossing the Middle Ridge.
树色随山迥，	I can see trees coloring a distant wall.
河声入海遥。	I can hear the river seeking the sea,
帝乡明日到，	As I the Imperial City tomorrow
犹自梦渔樵。	But I dream of woodsmen and fishermen.
遥夜泛清瑟，	There's a harp in the midnight playing clear,
西风生翠萝。	While the west wind rustles a green vine;
残萤栖玉露，	There's a low cloud touching the jade-white dew
早雁拂银河。	And an early wild goose in the River of Stars.
高树晓还密，	Night in the tall trees clings to dawn;
远山晴更多。	Light makes folds in the distant hills;
淮南一叶下，	And here on the Huai, by one falling leaf,
自觉老烟波。	I can feel a storm on Lake Dongting.
本以高难饱，	Pure of heart and therefore hungry,
徒劳恨费声。	All night long you have sung in vain
五更疏欲断，	Oh, this final broken indrawn breath
一树碧无情。	Among the green indifferent trees!
薄宦梗犹泛，	Yes, I have gone like a piece of driftwood,
故园芜已平。	I have let my garden fill with weeds.
烦君最相警，	I bless you for your true advice
我亦举家清。	To live as pure a life as yours.
凄凉宝剑篇，	I ponder on the poem of The Precious Dagger.
羁泊欲穷年。	My road has wound through many years.
黄叶仍风雨，	Now yellow leaves are shaken with a gale;
青楼自管弦。	Yet piping and fiddling keep the Blue Houses merry.
新知遭薄俗，	On the surface, I seem to be glad of new people;
旧好隔良缘。	But doomed to leave old friends behind me,
心断新丰酒，	I cry out from my heart for Xinfeng wine
销愁斗几千。	To melt away my thousand woes.
高阁客竟去，	Gone is the guest from the Chamber of Rank,
小园花乱飞。	And petals, confused in my little garden,
参差连曲陌，	Zigzagging down my crooked path,
迢递送斜晖。	Escort like dancers the setting sun.
肠断未忍扫，	Oh, how can I bear to sweep them away?
眼穿仍欲归。	To a sad-eyed watcher they never return.
芳心向春尽，	Heart's fragrance is spent with the ending of spring
所得是沾衣。	And nothing left but a tear-stained robe.
客去波平槛，	You are gone. The river is high at my door.
蝉休露满枝。	Cicadas are mute on dew-laden boughs.
永怀当此节，	This is a moment when thoughts enter deep.
倚立自移时。	I stand alone for a long while.
北斗兼春远，	The North Star is nearer to me now than spring,
南陵寓使迟。	And couriers from your southland never arrive
天涯占梦数，	Yet I doubt my dream on the far horizon
疑误有新知。	That you have found another friend.
残阳西入崦，	Where the sun has entered the western hills,
茅屋访孤僧。	I look for a monk in his little straw hut;
落叶人何在？	But only the fallen leaves are at home,
寒云路几层。	And I turn through chilling levels of cloud
独敲初夜磬，	I hear a stone gong in the dusk,
闲倚一枝藤。	I lean full-weight on my slender staff
世界微尘里，	How within this world, within this grain of dust,
吾宁爱与憎。	Can there be any room for the passions of men?
荒戍落黄叶，	The old fort brims with yellow leaves.
浩然离故关。	You insist upon forsaking this place where you have lived.
高风汉阳渡，	A high wind blows at Hanyang Ferry
初日郢门山。	And sunrise lights the summit of Yingmen.
江上几人在？	Who will be left for me along the upper Yangzi
天涯孤棹还。	After your solitary skiff has entered the end of the sky?
何当重相见？	I ask you over and over when we shall meet again,
樽酒慰离颜。	While we soften with wine cups this ache of farewell.
灞原风雨定，	After the shower at Bashang,
晚见雁行频。	I see an evening line of wild-geese,
落叶他乡树，	The limp-hanging leaves of a foreign tree,
寒灯独夜人。	A lantern's cold gleam, lonely in the night,
空园白露滴，	An empty garden, white with dew,
孤壁野僧邻。	The ruined wall of a neighboring monastery.
寄卧郊扉久，	I have taken my ease here long enough.
何年致此身？	What am I waiting for, I wonder.
露气寒光集，	A cold light shines on the gathering dew,
微阳下楚丘。	As sunset fades beyond the southern mountains;
猿啼洞庭树，	Trees echo with monkeys on the banks of Lake Dongting,
人在木兰舟。	Where somebody is moving in an orchid-wood boat.
广泽生明月，	Marsh-lands are swollen wide with the moon,
苍山夹乱流。	While torrents are bent to the mountains' will;
云中君不见，	And the vanished Queens of the Clouds leave me
竟夕自悲秋。	Sad with autumn all night long.
调角断清秋，	Though a bugle breaks the crystal air of autumn,
征人倚戍楼。	Soldiers, in the look-out, watch at ease today
春风对青冢，	The spring wind blowing across green graves
白日落梁州。	And the pale sun setting beyond Liangzhou.
大漠无兵阻，	For now, on grey plains done with war,
穷边有客游。	The border is open to travel again;
蕃情似此水，	And Tartars can no more choose than rivers:
长愿向南流。	They are running, all of them, toward the south.
迢递三巴路，	Farther and farther from the three Ba Roads,
羁危万里身。	I have come three thousand miles, anxious and watchful,
乱山残雪夜，	Through pale snow-patches in the jagged night mountains
孤独异乡春。	A stranger with a lonely lantern shaken in the wind.
渐与骨肉远，	Separation from my kin
转于僮仆亲。	Binds me closer to my servants
那堪正飘泊，	Yet how I dread, so far adrift,
明日岁华新。	New Year's Day, tomorrow morning!
几行归塞尽，	Line after line has flown back over the border.
片影独何之？	Where are you headed all by yourself?
暮雨相呼失，	In the evening rain you call to them
寒塘欲下迟。	And slowly you alight on an icy pond.
渚云低暗渡，	The low wet clouds move faster than you
关月冷相随。	Along the wall toward the cold moon.
未必逢矰缴，	If they caught you in a net or with a shot,
孤飞自可疑。	Would it be worse than flying alone?
早被婵娟误，	Knowing beauty my misfortune,
欲妆临镜慵。	I face my mirror with a sigh.
承恩不在貌，	To please a fastidious emperor,
教妾若为容？	How shall I array myself?.
风暖鸟声碎，	Birds flock and sing when the wind is warm,
日高花影重。	Flower-shadows climb when the sun is high
年年越溪女，	And year after year girls in the south
相忆采芙蓉。	Are picking hibiscus, dreaming of love!
清瑟怨遥夜，	Far through the night a harp is sighing
绕弦风雨哀。	With a sadness of wind and rain in the strings.
孤灯闻楚角，	There's a solitary lantern, a bugle-call
残月下章台。	And beyond Terrace Tower down goes the moon.
芳草已云暮，	Fragrant grasses have changed and faded
故人殊未来。	While still I have been hoping that my old friend would come.
乡书不可寄，	There are no more messengers I can send him,
秋雁又南回。	Now that the wild geese have turned south.
移家虽带郭，	To find you, moved beyond the city,
野径入桑麻。	A wide path led me, by mulberry and hemp,
近种篱边菊，	To a new-set hedge of chrysanthemums
秋来未著花。	Not yet blooming although autumn had come.
扣门无犬吠，	I knocked; no answer, not even a dog.
欲去问西家。	I waited to ask your western neighbor;
报到山中去，	But he told me that daily you climb the mountain,
归来每日斜。	Never returning until sunset.
昔人已乘黄鹤去，	Where long ago a yellow crane bore a sage to heaven,
此地空余黄鹤楼。	Nothing is left now but the Yellow Crane Terrace.
黄鹤一去不复返，	The yellow crane never revisited earth,
白云千载空悠悠。	And white clouds are flying without him for ever.
晴川历历汉阳树，	Every tree in Hanyang becomes clear in the water,
芳草萋萋鹦鹉洲。	And Parrot Island is a nest of sweet grasses;
日暮乡关何处是？	But I look toward home, and twilight grows dark
烟波江上使人愁。	With a mist of grief on the river waves.
岧峣太华俯咸京，	Lords of the capital, sharp, unearthly,
天外三峰削不成。	The Great Flower's three points pierce through heaven.
武帝祠前云欲散，	Clouds are parting above the Temple of the Warring Emperor,
仙人掌上雨初晴。	Rain dries on the mountain, on the Giant's Palm.
河山北枕秦关险，	Ranges and rivers are the strength of this western gate,
驿树西连汉畤平。	Whence roads and trails lead downward into China.
借问路傍名利客，	O pilgrim of fame, O seeker of profit,
无如此处学长生。	Why not remain here and lengthen your days?
朝闻游子唱骊歌，	The travelers' parting-song sounds in the dawn.
昨夜微霜初度河。	Last night a first frost came over the river;
鸿雁不堪愁里听，	And the crying of the wild-geese grieves my sad heart
云山况是客中过。	Bounded by a gloom of cloudy mountains.
关城树色催寒近，	Here in the Gate City, day will flush cold
御苑砧声向晚多。	And washing-flails quicken by the gardens at twilight
莫见长安行乐处，	How long shall the capital content you,
空令岁月易蹉跎。	Where the months and the years so vainly go by?
汉文皇帝有高台，	The Han Emperor Wen bequeathed us this terrace
此日登临曙色开。	Which I climb to watch the coming dawn.
三晋云山皆北向，	Cloudy peaks run northward in the three Jin districts,
二陵风雨自东来。	And rains are blowing westward through the two Ling valleys.
关门令尹谁能识？	Who knows but me about the Guard at the Gate,
河上仙翁去不回，	Or where the Magician of the River Bank is,
且欲竟寻彭泽宰，	Or how to find that magistrate, that poet,
陶然共醉菊花杯。	Who was as fond as I am of chrysanthemums and wine cups?
凤凰台上凤凰游，	OF PHOENIXES
凤去台空江自流。	Phoenixes that played here once, so that the place was named for them,
吴宫花草埋幽径，	Have abandoned it now to this desolate river;
晋代衣冠成古邱。	The paths of Wu Palace are crooked with weeds;
三台半落青山外，	The garments of Qin are ancient dust.
二水中分白鹭洲。	Like this green horizon halving the Three Peaks,
总为浮云能蔽日，	Like this Island of White Egrets dividing the river,
长安不见使人愁。	A cloud has arisen between the Light of Heaven and me, To hide his city from my melancholy heart.
嗟君此别意何如？	What are you thinking as we part from one another,
驻马衔杯问谪居。	Pulling in our horses for the stirrup-cups?
巫峡啼猿数行泪，	Do these tear-streaks mean Wu Valley monkeys all weeping,
衡阳归雁几封书。	Or wild-geese returning with news from Heng Mountain?.
青枫江上秋帆远，	On the river between green maples an autumn sail grows dim,
白帝城边古木疏。	There are only a few old trees by the wall of the White God City.
圣代即今多雨露，	But the year is bound to freshen us with a dew of heavenly favor
暂时分手莫踌躇。	Take heart, we shall soon be together again!
鸡鸣紫陌曙光寒，	Cock-crow, the Purple Road cold in the dawn;
莺啭皇州春色阑。	Linnet songs, court roofs tinted with April;
金阙晓钟开万户，	At the Golden Gate morning bell, countless doors open,
玉阶仙仗拥千官。	And up the jade steps float a thousand officials
花迎剑佩星初落，	With flowery scabbards. Stars have gone down;
柳拂旌旗露未乾。	Willows are brushing the dew from the flags
独有凤凰池上客，	And, alone on the Lake of the Phoenix, a guest
阳春一曲和皆难。	Is chanting too well The Song of Bright Spring.
绛帻鸡人送晓筹，	The red-capped Cock-Man has just announced morning;
尚衣方进翠云裘。	The Keeper of the Robes brings Jade-Cloud Furs;
九天阊阖开宫殿，	Heaven's nine doors reveal the palace and its courtyards;
万国衣冠拜冕旒。	And the coats of many countries bow to the Pearl Crown.
日色才临仙掌动，	Sunshine has entered the giants' carven palms;
香烟欲傍衮龙浮。	Incense wreathes the Dragon Robe:
朝罢须裁五色诏，	The audience adjourns-and the five-colored edict
佩声归向凤池头。	Sets girdle-beads clinking toward the Lake of the Phoenix.
渭水自萦秦塞曲，	Round a turn of the Qin Fortress winds the Wei River,
黄山旧绕汉宫斜。	And Yellow Mountain foot-hills enclose the Court of China;
銮舆迥出千门柳，	Past the South Gate willows comes the Car of Many Bells
阁道回看上苑花。	On the upper Palace-Garden Road-a solid length of blossom;
云里帝城双凤阙，	A Forbidden City roof holds two phoenixes in cloud;
雨中春树万人家。	The foliage of spring shelters multitudes from rain;
为乘阳气行时令，	And now, when the heavens are propitious for action,
不是宸游玩物华。	Here is our Emperor ready-no wasteful wanderer.
积雨空林烟火迟，	The woods have stored the rain, and slow comes the smoke
蒸藜炊黍饷东灾。	As rice is cooked on faggots and carried to the fields;
漠漠水田飞白鹭，	Over the quiet marsh-land flies a white egret,
阴阴夏木啭黄鹂。	And mango-birds are singing in the full summer trees.
山中习静观朝槿，	I have learned to watch in peace the mountain morning glories,
松下清斋折露葵。	To eat split dewy sunflower-seeds under a bough of pine,
野老与人争席罢，	To yield the post of honor to any boor at all.
海鸥何事更相疑？	Why should I frighten sea gulls, even with a thought?
洞门高阁霭余辉，	High beyond the thick wall a tower shines with sunset
桃李阴阴柳絮飞。	Where peach and plum are blooming and the willow cotton flies.
禁里疏钟官舍晚，	You have heard in your office the court-bell of twilight;
省中啼鸟吏人稀。	Birds find perches, officials head for home.
晨摇玉佩趋金殿，	Your morning-jade will tinkle as you thread the golden palace;
夕奉天书拜琐闱。	You will bring the word of Heaven from the closing gates at night.
强欲从君无那老，	And I should serve there with you; but being full of years,
将因卧病解朝衣。	I have taken off official robes and am resting from my troubles.
丞相祠堂何处寻？	Where is the temple of the famous Premier?
锦官城外柏森森，	In a deep pine grove near the City of Silk,
映阶碧草自春色，	With the green grass of spring coloring the steps,
隔叶黄鹂空好音。	And birds chirping happily under the leaves.
三顾频烦天下计，	The third summons weighted him with affairs of state
两朝开济老臣心。	And to two generations he gave his true heart,
出师未捷身先死，	But before he could conquer, he was dead;
长使英雄泪满襟。	And heroes have wept on their coats ever since.
舍南舍北皆春水，	North of me, south of me, spring is in flood,
但见群鸥日日来。	Day after day I have seen only gulls.
花径不曾缘客扫，	My path is full of petals -- I have swept it for no others.
蓬门今始为君开。	My thatch gate has been closed -- but opens now for you.
盘飧市远无兼味，	It's a long way to the market, I can offer you little
樽酒家贫只旧醅。	Yet here in my cottage there is old wine for our cups.
肯与邻翁相对饮，	Shall we summon my elderly neighbor to join us,
隔篱呼取尽余杯。	Call him through the fence, and pour the jar dry?
西山白雪三城戍，	Snow is white on the westward mountains and on three fortified towns,
南浦清江万里桥。	And waters in this southern lake flash on a long bridge.
海内风尘诸弟隔，	But wind and dust from sea to sea bar me from my brothers;
天涯涕泪一身遥。	And I cannot help crying, I am so far away.
唯将迟暮供多病，	I have nothing to expect now but the ills of old age.
未有涓埃答圣朝。	I am of less use to my country than a grain of dust.
跨马出郊时极目，	I ride out to the edge of town. I watch on the horizon,
不堪人事日萧条。	Day after day, the chaos of the world.
剑外忽传收蓟北，	News at this far western station! The north has been recaptured!
初闻涕泪满衣裳。	At first I cannot check the tears from pouring on my coat
却看妻子愁何在？	Where is my wife? Where are my sons?
漫卷诗书喜欲狂。	Yet crazily sure of finding them, I pack my books and poems
白日放歌须纵酒，	And loud my song and deep my drink
青春作伴好还乡。	On the green spring-day that starts me home,
即从巴峡穿巫峡，	Back from this mountain, past another mountain,
便下襄阳向洛阳。	Up from the south, north again-to my own town!
风急天高猿啸哀，	In a sharp gale from the wide sky apes are whimpering,
渚清沙白鸟飞回。	Birds are flying homeward over the clear lake and white sand,
无边落木萧萧下，	Leaves are dropping down like the spray of a waterfall,
不尽长江滚滚来。	While I watch the long river always rolling on.
万里悲秋常作客，	I have come three thousand miles away. Sad now with autumn
百年多病独登台。	And with my hundred years of woe, I climb this height alone.
艰难苦恨繁霜鬓，	Ill fortune has laid a bitter frost on my temples,
潦倒新停浊酒杯。	Heart-ache and weariness are a thick dust in my wine.
花近高楼伤客心，	Flowers, as high as my window, hurt the heart of a wanderer
万方多难此登临。	For I see, from this high vantage, sadness everywhere.
锦江春色来天地，	The Silken River, bright with spring, floats between earth and heaven
玉垒浮云变古今。	Like a line of cloud by the Jade Peak, between ancient days and now.
北极朝庭终不改，	Though the State is established for a while as firm as the North Star
西山寇盗莫相侵。	And bandits dare not venture from the western hills,
可怜后主还祠庙，	Yet sorry in the twilight for the woes of a long vanished Emperor,
日暮聊为梁父吟。	I am singing the song his Premier sang when still unestranged from the mountain.
清秋幕府井梧寒，	The autumn night is clear and cold in the lakka-trees of this courtyard.
独宿江城蜡炬残。	I am lying forlorn in the river-town. I watch my guttering candle.
永夜角声悲自语，	I hear the lonely notes of a bugle sounding through the dark.
中天月色好谁看？	The moon is in mid-heaven, but there's no one to share it with me.
风尘荏苒音书绝，	My messengers are scattered by whirls of rain and sand.
关塞萧条行陆难。	City-gates are closed to a traveller; mountains are walls in my way
已忍伶俜十年事，	Yet, I who have borne ten years of pitiable existence,
强移栖息一枝安。	Find here a perch, a little branch, and am safe for this one night.
岁暮阴阳催短景，	While winter daylight shortens in the elemental scale
天涯霜雪霁寒霄。	And snow and frost whiten the cold-circling night,
五更鼓角声悲壮，	Stark sounds the fifth-watch with a challenge of drum and bugle.
三峡星河影动摇。	The stars and the River of Heaven pulse over the three mountains;
野哭千家闻战伐，	I hear women in the distance, wailing after the battle;
夷歌数处起渔樵。	I see barbarian fishermen and woodcutters in the dawn.
卧龙跃马终黄土，	Sleeping-Dragon, Plunging-Horse, are no generals now, they are dust
人事音书漫寂寥。	Hush for a moment, O tumult of the world.
支离东北风尘际，	Forlorn in the northeast among wind and dust,
漂泊西南天地间。	Drifting in the southwest between heaven and earth,
三峡楼台淹日月，	Lingering for days and months in towers and terraces at the Three Gorges,
五溪衣服共云山。	Sharing clouds and mountains with the costumes of the Five Streams.
羯胡事主终无赖，	The barbarian serving the ruler in the end was unreliable.
词客哀时且未还。	The wandering poet lamenting the times had no chance to return.
庾信平生最萧瑟，	Yu Xin throughout his life was most miserable,
暮年诗赋动江关。	In his waning years his poetry stirred the land of rivers and passes.
摇落深知宋玉悲，	"Decay and decline": deep knowledge have I of Sung Yu's grief.
风流儒雅亦吾师。	Romantic and refined, he too is my teacher.
怅望千秋一洒泪，	Sadly looking across a thousand autumns, one shower of tears,
萧条异代不同时。	Melancholy in different epochs, not at the same time.
江山故宅空文藻，	Among rivers and mountains his old abode -- empty his writings;
云雨荒台岂梦思。	Deserted terrace of cloud and rain -- surely not just imagined in a dream?
最是楚宫俱泯灭，	Utterly the palaces of Chu are all destroyed and ruined,
舟人指点到今疑。	The fishermen pointing them out today are unsure.
群山万壑赴荆门，	Ten thousand ranges and valleys approach the Jing Gate
生长明妃尚有村。	And the village in which the Lady of Light was born and bred.
一去紫台连朔漠，	She went out from the purple palace into the desert land;
独留青冢向黄昏。	She has now become a green grave in the yellow dusk.
画图省识春风面，	Her face ! Can you picture a wind of the spring?
环佩空归月下魂。	Her spirit by moonlight returns with a tinkling
千载琵琶作胡语，	Song of the Tartars on her jade guitar,
分明怨恨曲中论。	Telling her eternal sorrow.
蜀主征吴幸三峡，	The ruler of Shu had his eyes on Wu and progressed as far as the Three Gorges.
崩年亦在永安宫。	In the year of his demise, too, he was in the Palace of Eternal Peace.
翠华想像空山里，	The blue-green banners can be imagined on the empty mountain,
玉殿虚无野寺中。	The jade palace is a void in the deserted temple.
古庙杉松巢水鹤，	In the pines of the ancient shrine aquatic cranes nest;
岁时伏腊走村翁。	At summer and winter festivals the comers are village elders.
武侯祠屋常邻近，	The Martial Marquis's memorial shrine is ever nearby;
一体君臣祭祀同。	In union, sovereign and minister share the sacrifices together.
诸葛大名垂宇宙，	Zhuge's prestige transcends the earth;
宗臣遗像肃清高。	There is only reverence for his face;
三分割据纡筹策，	Yet his will, among the Three Kingdoms at war,
万古云霄一羽毛。	Was only as one feather against a flaming sky.
伯仲之间见伊吕，	He was brother of men like Yi and Lu
指挥若定失萧曹。	And in time would have surpassed the greatest of all statesmen.
运移汉祚终难复，	Though he knew there was no hope for the House of Han,
志决身歼军务劳。	Yet he wielded his mind for it, yielded his life.
生涯岂料承优诏？	Dare I, at my age, accept my summons,
世事空知学醉歌。	Knowing of the world's ways only wine and song?.
江上月明胡雁过，	Over the moon-edged river come wild-geese from the Tartars;
淮南木落楚山多。	And the thinner the leaves along the Huai, the wider the southern mountains.
寄身且喜沧洲近，	I ought to be glad to take my old bones back to the capital,
顾影无如白发何！	But what am I good for in that world, with my few white hairs?.
今日龙钟人共老，	As bent and decrepit as you are, I am ashamed to thank you,
愧君犹遣慎风波。	When you caution me that I may encounter thunderbolts.
三年谪宦此栖迟，	Here, where you spent your three years' exile,
万古惟留楚客悲。	To be mourned in Chu ten thousand years,
秋草独寻人去后，	Can I trace your footprint in the autumn grass
寒林空见日斜时。	Or only slanting sunlight through the bleak woods?
汉文有道恩犹薄，	If even good Emperor Wen was cold-hearted,
湘水无情吊岂知？	Could you hope that the dull river Xiang would understand you,
寂寂江山摇落处，	These desolate waters, these taciturn mountains,
怜君何事到天涯？	When you came, like me, so far away?
汀洲无浪复无烟，	No ripples in the river, no mist on the islands,
楚客相思益渺然。	Yet the landscape is blurred toward my friend in Chu.
汉口夕阳斜渡鸟，	Birds in the slanting sun cross Hankou,
洞庭秋水远连天。	And the autumn sky mingles with Lake Dongting.
孤城背岭寒吹角，	From a bleak mountain wall the cold tone of a bugle
独戍临江夜泊船。	Reminds me, moored by a ruined fort,
贾谊上书忧汉室，	That Jia Yi's loyal plea to the House of Han
长沙谪去古今怜。	Banned him to Changsha, to be an exile.
二月黄鹂飞上林，	Finches flash yellow through the Imperial Grove
春城紫禁晓阴阴。	Of the Forbidden City, pale with spring dawn;
长乐钟声花外尽，	Flowers muffle a bell in the Palace of Bliss
龙池柳色雨中深。	And rain has deepened the Dragon Lake willows;
阳和不散穷途恨，	But spring is no help to a man bewildered,
霄汉长怀捧日心。	Who would be like a cloud upholding the Light of Heaven,
献赋十年犹未遇，	Yet whose poems, ten years refused, are shaming
羞将白发对华簪。	These white hairs held by the petalled pin.
去年花里逢君别，	We met last among flowers, among flowers we parted,
今日花开又一年。	And here, a year later, there are flowers again;
世事茫茫难自料，	But, with ways of the world too strange to foretell,
春愁黯黯独成眠。	Spring only brings me grief and fatigue.
身多疾病思田里，	I am sick, and I think of my home in the country-
邑有流亡愧俸钱。	Ashamed to take pay while so many are idle.
闻道欲来相问讯，	In my western tower, because of your promise,
西楼望月几回圆。	I have watched the full moons come and go.
仙台初见五城楼，	I face, high over this enchanted lodge, the Court of the Five Cities of Heaven,
风物凄凄宿雨收。	And I see a countryside blue and still, after the long rain.
山色遥连秦树晚，	The distant peaks and trees of Qin merge into twilight,
砧声近报汉宫秋。	And Had Palace washing-stones make their autumnal echoes.
疏松影落空坛静，	Thin pine-shadows brush the outdoor pulpit,
细草香闲小洞幽。	And grasses blow their fragrance into my little cave.
何用别寻方外去？	Who need be craving a world beyond this one?
人间亦自有丹丘。	Here, among men, are the Purple Hills
莺啼燕语报新年，	Finch-notes and swallow-notes tell the new year.
马邑龙堆路几千。	But so far are the Town of the Horse and the Dragon Mound
家住层城邻汉苑，	From this our house, from these walls and Han Gardens,
心随明月到胡天。	That the moon takes my heart to the Tartar sky.
机中锦字论长恨，	I have woven in the frame endless words of my grieving.
楼上花枝笑独眠。	Yet this petal-bough is smiling now on my lonely sleep.
为问天戎窦车骑，	Oh, ask General Dou when his flags will come home
何时返旆勒燕然。	And his triumph be carved on the rock of Yanran mountain!
云开远见汉阳城，	Far off in the clouds stand the walls of Hanyang,
犹是孤帆一日程。	Another day's journey for my lone sail.
估客昼眠知浪静，	Though a river-merchant ought to sleep in this calm weather,
舟人夜语觉潮生。	I listen to the tide at night and voices of the boatmen.
三湘愁鬓逢秋色，	My thin hair grows wintry, like the triple Xiang streams,
万里归心对月明。	Three thousand miles my heart goes, homesick with the moon;
旧业已随征战尽，	But the war has left me nothing of my heritage
更堪江上鼓鼙声。	And oh, the pang of hearing these drums along the river!
城上高楼接大荒，	At this lofty tower where the town ends, wilderness begins;
海天愁思正茫茫。	And our longing has as far to go as the ocean or the sky.
惊风乱飐芙蓉水，	Hibiscus-flowers by the moat heave in a sudden wind,
密雨斜侵薜荔墙。	And vines along the wall are whipped with slanting rain.
岭树重遮千里目，	Nothing to see for three hundred miles but a blur of woods and mountain
江流曲似九回肠。	And the river's nine loops, twisting in our bowels.
共来百越文身地，	This is where they have sent us, this land of tattooed people
犹自音书滞一乡。	And not even letters, to keep us in touch with home.
王浚楼船下益州，	Since Wang Jun brought his towering ships down from Yizhou,
金陵王气黯然收。	The royal ghost has pined in the city of Nanjing.
千寻铁锁沈江底，	Ten thousand feet of iron chain were sunk here to the bottom
一片降旛出石头。	And then came the flag of surrender on the Wall of Stone.
人世几回伤往事，	Cycles of change have moved into the past,
山形依旧枕寒流。	While still this mountain dignity has commanded the cold river;
从今四海为家日，	And now comes the day of the Chinese world united,
故垒萧萧芦荻秋。	And the old forts fill with ruin and with autumn reeds.
谢公最小偏怜女，	O youngest, best-loved daughter of Xie,
自嫁黔娄百事乖。	Who unluckily married this penniless scholar,
顾我无衣搜荩箧，	You patched my clothes from your own wicker basket,
泥他沽酒拔金钗。	And I coaxed off your hairpins of gold, to buy wine with;
野蔬充膳甘长藿，	For dinner we had to pick wild herbs
落叶添薪仰古槐。	And to use dry locust-leaves for our kindling.
今日俸钱过十万，	Today they are paying me a hundred thousand
与君营奠复营斋。	And all that I can bring to you is a temple sacrifice.
昔日戏言身后事，	We joked, long ago, about one of us dying,
今朝都到眼前来。	But suddenly, before my eyes, you are gone.
衣裳已施行看尽，	Almost all your clothes have been given away;
针线犹存未忍开。	Your needlework is sealed, I dare not look at it.
尚想旧情怜婢仆，	I continue your bounty to our men and our maids
也曾因梦送钱财。	Sometimes, in a dream, I bring you gifts.
诚知此恨人人有，	This is a sorrow that all mankind must know
贫贱夫妻百事哀。	But not as those know it who have been poor together.
闲坐悲君亦自悲，	I sit here alone, mourning for us both.
百年都是几多时？	How many years do I lack now of my threescore and ten?
邓攸无子寻知命，	There have been better men than I to whom heaven denied a son,
潘岳悼亡犹费词。	There was a poet better than I whose dead wife could not hear him.
同穴窅冥何所望？	What have I to hope for in the darkness of our tomb?
他生缘会更难期。	You and I had little faith in a meeting after death-
惟将终夜长开眼，	Yet my open eyes can see all night
报答平生未展眉。	That lifelong trouble of your brow.
田园寥落干戈后，	My heritage lost through disorder and famine,
骨肉流离道路中。	My brothers and sisters flung eastward and westward,
吊影分为千里雁，	My fields and gardens wrecked by the war,
辞根散作九秋蓬。	My own flesh and blood become scum of the street,
共看明月应垂泪，	I moan to my shadow like a lone-wandering wild-geese,
一夜乡心五处同。	I am torn from my root like a water-plant in autumn:
锦瑟无端五十弦，	I wonder why my inlaid harp has fifty strings,
一弦一柱思华年。	Each with its flower-like fret an interval of youth.
庄生晓梦迷蝴蝶，	The sage Chuangzi is day-dreaming, bewitched by butterflies,
望帝春心托杜鹃。	The spring-heart of Emperor Wang is crying in a cuckoo,
沧海月明珠有泪，	Mermen weep their pearly tears down a moon-green sea,
蓝田日暖玉生烟。	Blue fields are breathing their jade to the sun.
此情可待成追忆，	And a moment that ought to have lasted for ever
只是当时已惘然。	Has come and gone before I knew.
昨夜星辰昨夜风，	The stars of last night and the wind of last night
画楼西畔桂堂东。	Are west of the Painted Chamber and east of Cinnamon Hall.
身无彩凤双飞翼，	Though I have for my body no wings like those of the bright-colored phoenix,
心有灵犀一点通。	Yet I feel the harmonious heart-beat of the Sacred Unicorn.
隔座送钩春酒暖，	Across the spring-wine, while it warms me, I prompt you how to bet
分曹射覆蜡灯红。	Where, group by group, we are throwing dice in the light of a crimson lamp;
嗟余听鼓应官去，	Till the rolling of a drum, alas, calls me to my duties
走马兰台类转蓬。	And I mount my horse and ride away, like a water-plant cut adrift.
紫泉宫殿锁烟霞，	His Palace of Purple Spring has been taken by mist and cloud,
欲取芜城作帝家。	As he would have taken all Yangzhou to be his private domain
玉玺不缘归日角，	But for the seal of imperial jade being seized by the first Tang Emperor,
锦帆应是到天涯。	He would have bounded with his silken sails the limits of the world.
于今腐草无萤火，	Fire-flies are gone now, have left the weathered grasses,
终古垂杨有暮鸦。	But still among the weeping-willows crows perch at twilight.
地下若逢陈后主，	If he meets, there underground, the Later Chen Emperor,
岂宜重问后庭花？	Do you think that they will mention a Song of Courtyard Flowers?
来是空言去绝踪，	You said you would come, but you did not, and you left me with no other trace
月斜楼上五更钟。	Than the moonlight on your tower at the fifth-watch bell.
梦为远别啼难唤，	I cry for you forever gone, I cannot waken yet,
书被催成墨未浓。	I try to read your hurried note, I find the ink too pale.
蜡照半笼金翡翠，	Blue burns your candle in its kingfisher-feather lantern
麝熏微度绣芙蓉。	And a sweet breath steals from your hibiscus broidered curtain.
刘郎已恨蓬山远，	But far beyond my reach is the Enchanted Mountain,
更隔蓬山一万重。	And you are on the other side, ten thousand peaks away.
飒飒东风细雨来，	A misty rain comes blowing with a wind from the east,
芙蓉塘外有轻雷。	And wheels faintly thunder beyond Hibiscus Pool.
金蟾啮璅烧香入，	Round the golden-toad lock, incense is creeping;
玉虎牵丝汲井回。	The jade tiger tells, on its cord, of water being drawn
贾氏窥帘韩掾少，	A great lady once, from behind a screen, favored a poor youth;
宓妃留枕魏王才。	A fairy queen brought a bridal mat once for the ease of a prince and then vanished.
春心莫共花争发，	Must human hearts blossom in spring, like all other flowers?
一寸想思一寸灰。	And of even this bright flame of love, shall there be only ashes?
猿鸟犹疑畏简书，	Monkeys and birds are still alert for your orders
风云常为护储胥。	And winds and clouds eager to shield your fortress.
徒令上将挥神笔，	You were master of the brush, and a sagacious general,
终见降王走传车。	But your Emperor, defeated, rode the prison-cart.
管乐有才原不忝，	You were abler than even the greatest Zhou statesmen,
关张无命欲何如？	Yet less fortunate than the two Shu generals who were killed in action.
他年锦里经祠庙，	And, though at your birth-place a temple has been built to you,
梁父吟成恨有余。	You never finished singing your Song of the Holy Mountain
相见时难别亦难，	Time was long before I met her, but is longer since we parted,
东风无力百花残。	And the east wind has arisen and a hundred flowers are gone,
春蚕到死丝方尽，	And the silk-worms of spring will weave until they die
蜡炬成灰泪始乾。	And every night the candles will weep their wicks away.
晓镜但愁云鬓改，	Mornings in her mirror she sees her hair-cloud changing,
夜吟应觉月光寒。	Yet she dares the chill of moonlight with her evening song.
蓬莱此去无多路，	It is not so very far to her Enchanted Mountain
青鸟殷勤为探看。	O blue-birds, be listening!-Bring me what she says!
怅卧新春白袷衣，	I am lying in a white-lined coat while the spring approaches,
白门寥落意多违。	But am thinking only of the White Gate City where I cannot be.
红楼隔雨相望冷，	There are two red chambers fronting the cold, hidden by the rain,
珠箔飘灯独自归。	And a lantern on a pearl screen swaying my lone heart homeward.
远路应悲春晼晚，	The long road ahead will be full of new hardship,
残宵犹得梦依稀。	With, late in the nights, brief intervals of dream.
玉珰缄札何由达，	Oh, to send you this message, this pair of jade earrings!
万里云罗一雁飞。	I watch a lonely wild-geese in three thousand miles of cloud.
凤尾香罗薄几重，	A faint phoenix-tail gauze, fragrant and doubled,
碧文圆顶夜深缝。	Lines your green canopy, closed for the night.
扇裁月魄羞难掩，	Will your shy face peer round a moon-shaped fan,
车走雷声语未通。	And your voice be heard hushing the rattle of my carriage?
曾是寂寥金烬暗，	It is quiet and quiet where your gold lamp dies,
断无消息石榴红。	How far can a pomegranate-blossom whisper?
斑骓只系垂杨岸，	I will tether my horse to a river willow
何处西南任好风？	And wait for the will of the southwest wind.
重帷深下莫愁堂，	There are many curtains in your care-free house,
卧后清宵细细长。	Where rapture lasts the whole night long.
神女生涯原是梦，	What are the lives of angels but dreams
小姑居处本无郎。	If they take no lovers into their rooms?
风波不信菱枝弱，	Storms are ravishing the nut-horns,
月露谁教桂叶香。	Moon- dew sweetening cinnamon-leaves
直道相思了无益，	I know well enough naught can come of this union,
未妨惆怅是清狂。	Yet how it serves to ease my heart!
澹然空水对斜晖，	The sun has set in the water's clear void,
曲岛苍茫接翠微。	And little blue islands are one with the sky.
波上马嘶看棹去，	On the bank a horse neighs. A boat goes by.
柳边人歇待船归。	People gather at a willow- clump and wait for the ferry.
数丛沙草群鸥散，	Down by the sand-bushes sea-gulls are circling,
万顷江田一鹭飞。	Over the wide river-lands flies an egret.
谁解乘舟寻范蠡？	Can you guess why I sail, like an ancient wise lover,
五湖烟水独忘机。	Through the misty Five Lakes, forgetting words?
苏武魂销汉使前，	Though our envoy, Su Wu, is gone, body and soul,
古祠高树两茫然。	This temple survives, these trees endure.
云边雁断胡天月，	Wild-geese through the clouds are still calling to the moon there
陇上羊归塞草烟。	And hill-sheep unshepherded graze along the border.
回日楼台非甲帐，	Returning, he found his country changed
去时冠剑是丁年。	Since with youthful cap and sword he had left it.
茂陵不见封侯印，	His bitter adventures had won him no title.
空向秋波哭逝川。	Autumn-waves endlessly sob in the river.
十二楼中尽晓妆，	In twelve chambers the ladies, decked for the day,
望仙楼上望君王。	Peer afar for their lord from their Fairy-View Lodge;
锁衔金兽连环冷，	The golden toad guards the lock on the door-chain,
水滴铜龙昼漏长。	And the bronze-dragon water-clock drips through the morning
云髻罢梳还对镜，	Till one of them, tilting a mirror, combs her cloud of hair
罗衣欲换更添香。	And chooses new scent and a change of silk raiment;
遥窥正殿帘开处，	For she sees, between screen-panels, deep in the palace,
袍裤宫人扫御床。	Eunuchs in court-dress preparing a bed.
蓬门未识绮罗香，	Living under a thatch roof, never wearing fragrant silk,
拟托良媒益自伤。	She longs to arrange a marriage, but how could she dare?
谁爱风流高格调，	Who would know her simple face the loveliest of them all
共怜时世俭梳妆。	When we choose for worldliness, not for worth?
敢将十指夸针巧，	Her fingers embroider beyond compare,
不把双眉斗画长。	But she cannot vie with painted brows;
苦恨年年压金线，	And year after year she has sewn gold thread
为他人作嫁衣裳。	On bridal robes for other girls.
卢家少妇郁金香，	A girl of the Lu clan who lives in Golden-Wood Hall,
海燕双栖玳瑁梁。	Where swallows perch in pairs on beams of tortoiseshell,
九月寒砧催木叶，	Hears the washing-mallets' cold beat shake the leaves down.
十年征戍忆辽阳。	The Liaoyang expedition will be gone ten years,
白狼河北音书断，	And messages are lost in the White Wolf River.
丹凤城南秋夜长。	Here in the City of the Red Phoenix autumn nights are long,
谁为含愁独不见，	Where one who is heart-sick to see beyond seeing,
更教明月照流黄。	Sees only moonlight on the yellow-silk wave of her loom.
空山不见人，	There seems to be no one on the empty mountain.
但闻人语响。	And yet I think I hear a voice,
返景入深林，	Where sunlight, entering a grove,
复照青苔上。	Shines back to me from the green moss.
独坐幽篁里，	Leaning alone in the close bamboos,
弹琴复长啸。	I am playing my lute and humming a song
深林人不知，	Too softly for anyone to hear
明月来相照。	Except my comrade, the bright moon.
山中相送罢，	Friend, I have watched you down the mountain
日暮掩柴扉。	Till now in the dark I close my thatch door.
春草明年绿，	Grasses return again green in the spring,
王孙归不归。	But O my Prince of Friends, do you?
红豆生南国，	When those red berries come in springtime,
春来发几枝。	Flushing on your southland branches,
愿君多采撷，	Take home an armful, for my sake,
此物最相思。	As a symbol of our love.
君自故乡来，	You who have come from my old country,
应知故乡事。	Tell me what has happened there !
来日绮窗前，	Was the plum, when you passed my silken window,
寒梅著花未。	Opening its first cold blossom?
归山深浅去，	Though you think to return to this maze of mountains,
须尽丘壑美。	Oh, let them brim your heart with wonder!
莫学武陵人，	Remember the fisherman from Wuling
暂游桃源里。	Who had only a day in the Peach-Blossom Country.
终南阴岭秀，	See how Zhongnan Mountain soars
积雪浮云端。	With its white top over floating clouds
林表明霁色，	And a warm sky opening at the snow-line
城中增暮寒。	While the town in the valley grows colder and colder.
移舟泊烟渚，	While my little boat moves on its mooring of mist,
日暮客愁新。	And daylight wanes, old memories begin.
野旷天低树，	How wide the world was, how close the trees to heaven,
江清月近人。	And how clear in the water the nearness of the moon!
春眠不觉晓，	I awake light-hearted this morning of spring,
处处闻啼鸟。	Everywhere round me the singing of birds
夜来风雨声，	But now I remember the night, the storm,
花落知多少。	And I wonder how many blossoms were broken.
床前明月光，	So bright a gleam on the foot of my bed
疑是地上霜。	Could there have been a frost already?
举头望明月，	Lifting myself to look, I found that it was moonlight.
低头思故乡。	Sinking back again, I thought suddenly of home.
美人卷珠帘，	How beautiful she looks, opening the pearly casement,
深坐蹙蛾眉。	And how quiet she leans, and how troubled her brow is!
但见泪痕湿，	You may see the tears now, bright on her cheek,
不知心恨谁。	But not the man she so bitterly loves.
功盖三分国，	The Three Kingdoms, divided, have been bound by his greatness.
名成八阵图。	The Eight-Sided Fortress is founded on his fame;
江流石不转，	Beside the changing river, it stands stony as his grief
遗恨失吞吴。	That he never conquered the Kingdom of Wu.
白日依山尽，	Mountains cover the white sun,
黄河入海流。	And oceans drain the golden river;
欲穷千里目，	But you widen your view three hundred miles
更上一层楼。	By going up one flight of stairs.
苍苍竹林寺，	From the temple, deep in its tender bamboos,
杳杳钟声晚。	Comes the low sound of an evening bell,
荷笠带斜阳，	While the hat of a pilgrim carries the sunset
青山独归远。	Farther and farther down the green mountain.
泠泠七弦上，	Your seven strings are like the voice
静听松风寒。	Of a cold wind in the pines,
古调虽自爱，	Singing old beloved songs
今人多不弹。	Which no one cares for any more.
孤云将野鹤，	Can drifting clouds and white storks
岂向人间住。	Be tenants in this world of ours?
莫买沃洲山，	Or you still live on Wuzhou Mountain,
时人已知处。	Now that people are coming here?
怀君属秋夜，	As I walk in the cool of the autumn night,
散步咏凉天。	Thinking of you, singing my poem,
空山松子落，	I hear a mountain pine-cone fall.
幽人应未眠。	You also seem to be awake.
鸣筝金粟柱，	Her hands of white jade by a window of snow
素手玉房前。	Are glimmering on a golden-fretted harp
欲得周郎顾，	And to draw the quick eye of Chou Yu,
时时误拂弦。	She touches a wrong note now and then.
三日入厨下，	On the third day, taking my place to cook,
洗手作羹汤。	Washing my hands to make the bridal soup,
未谙姑食性，	I decide that not my mother-in-law
先遣小姑尝。	But my husband's young sister shall have the fiat taste.
昨夜裙带解，	Last night my girdle came undone,
今朝蟢子飞。	And this morning a luck-beetle flew over my bed.
铅华不可弃，	So here are my paints and here are my powders
莫是□砧归。	And a welcome for my yoke again.
千山鸟飞绝，	A hundred mountains and no bird,
万径人踪灭。	A thousand paths without a footprint;
孤舟蓑笠翁，	A little boat, a bamboo cloak,
独钓寒江雪。	An old man fishing in the cold river-snow.
寥落古行宫，	In the faded old imperial palace,
宫花寂寞红。	Peonies are red, but no one comes to see them.
白头宫女在，	The ladies-in-waiting have grown white-haired
闲坐说玄宗。	Debating the pomps of Emperor Xuanzong.
绿螘新醅酒，	There's a gleam of green in an old bottle,
红泥小火炉。	There's a stir of red in the quiet stove,
晚来天欲雪，	There's a feeling of snow in the dusk outside
能饮一杯无。	What about a cup of wine inside?
故国三千里，	A lady of the palace these twenty years,
深宫二十年。	She has lived here a thousand miles from her home-
一声何满子，	Yet ask her for this song and, with the first few words of it,
双泪落君前。	See how she tries to hold back her tears.
向晚意不适，	With twilight shadows in my heart
驱车登古原。	I have driven up among the Leyou Tombs
夕阳无限好，	To see the sun, for all his glory,
只是近黄昏。	Buried by the coming night.
松下问童子，	When I questioned your pupil, under a pine-tree,
言师采药去。	"My teacher," he answered, " went for herbs,
只在此山中，	But toward which corner of the mountain,
云深不知处。	How can I tell, through all these clouds ?"
岭外音书绝，	Away from home, I was longing for news
经冬复立春。	Winter after winter, spring after spring.
近乡情更怯，	Now, nearing my village, meeting people,
不敢问来人。	I dare not ask a single question.
打起黄莺儿，	Drive the orioles away,
莫教枝上啼。	All their music from the trees.
啼时惊妾梦，	When she dreamed that she went to Liaoxi Camp
不得到辽西。	To join him there, they wakened her
北斗七星高，	This constellation, with its seven high stars,
哥舒夜带刀。	Is Ge Shu lifting his sword in the night:
至今窥牧马，	And no more barbarians, nor their horses, nor cattle,
不敢过临洮。	Dare ford the river boundary.
君家何处住，	"Tell me, where do you live?
妾住在横塘。	Near here, by the fishing-pool?
停船暂借问，	Let's hold our boats together, let's see
或恐是同乡。	If we belong in the same town."
家临九江水，	"Yes, I live here, by the river;
来去九江侧。	I have sailed on it many and many a time.
同是长干人，	Both of us born in Changgan, you and I!
生小不相识。	Why haven't we always known each other?"
玉阶生白露，	Her jade-white staircase is cold with dew;
夜久侵罗袜。	Her silk soles are wet, she lingered there so long.
却下水晶帘，	Behind her closed casement, why is she still waiting,
玲珑望秋月。	Watching through its crystal pane the glow of the autumn moon?
鹫翎金仆姑，	His golden arrow is tipped with hawk's feathers,
燕尾绣蝥弧。	His embroidered silk flag has a tail like a swallow.
独立扬新令，	One man, arising, gives a new order
千营共一呼。	To the answering shout of a thousand tents.
林暗草惊风，	The woods are black and a wind assails the grasses,
将军夜引弓。	Yet the general tries night archery
平明寻白羽，	And next morning he finds his white-plumed arrow
没在石棱中。	Pointed deep in the hard rock.
月黑雁飞高，	High in the faint moonlight, wild-geese are soaring.
单于夜遁逃。	Tartar chieftains are fleeing through the dark
欲将轻骑逐，	And we chase them, with horses lightly burdened
大雪满弓刀。	And a burden of snow on our bows and our swords.
野幕蔽琼筵，	Let feasting begin in the wild camp!
羌戎贺劳旋。	Let bugles cry our victory!
醉和金甲舞，	Let us drink, let us dance in our golden armor!
雷鼓动山川。	Let us thunder on rivers and hills with our drums!
嫁得瞿塘贾，	Since I married the merchant of Qutang
朝朝误妾期。	He has failed each day to keep his word.
早知潮有信，	Had I thought how regular the tide is,
嫁与弄潮儿。	I might rather have chosen a river-boy.
少小离家老大回，	I left home young. I return old;
乡音无改鬓毛衰；	Speaking as then, but with hair grown thin;
儿童相见不相识，	And my children, meeting me, do not know me.
笑问客从何处来。	They smile and say: "Stranger, where do you come from?"
隐隐飞桥隔野烟，	A bridge flies away through a wild mist,
石矶西畔问渔船；	Yet here are the rocks and the fisherman's boat.
桃花尽日随流水，	Oh, if only this river of floating peach-petals
洞在清溪何处边？	Might lead me at last to the mythical cave!
独在异乡为异客，	All alone in a foreign land,
每逢佳节倍思亲。	I am twice as homesick on this day
遥知兄弟登高处，	When brothers carry dogwood up the mountain,
遍插茱萸少一人。	Each of them a branch-and my branch missing.
寒雨连江夜入吴，	With this cold night-rain hiding the river, you have come into Wu.
平明送客楚山孤。	In the level dawn, all alone, you will be starting for the mountains of Chu.
洛阳亲友如相问，	Answer, if they ask of me at Loyang:
一片冰心在玉壶。	"One-hearted as ice in a crystal vase."
闺中少妇不知愁，	Too young to have learned what sorrow means,
春日凝妆上翠楼。	Attired for spring, she climbs to her high chamber.
忽见陌头杨柳色，	The new green of the street-willows is wounding her heart
悔教夫婿觅封侯。	Just for a title she sent him to war.
昨夜风开露井桃，	Last night, while a gust blew peach-petals open
未央前殿月轮高。	And the moon shone high on the Palace Beyond Time,
平阳歌舞新承宠，	The Emperor gave Pingyang, for her dancing,
帘外春寒赐锦袍。	Brocades against the cold spring-wind.
葡萄美酒夜光杯，	They sing, they drain their cups of jade,
欲饮琵琶马上催。	They strum on horseback their guitars.
醉卧沙场君莫笑，	Why laugh when they fall asleep drunk on the sand ?
古来征战几人回。	-- How many soldiers ever come home?
故人西辞黄鹤楼，	You have left me behind, old friend, at the Yellow Crane Terrace,
烟花三月下扬州。	On your way to visit Yangzhou in the misty month of flowers;
孤帆远影碧空尽，	Your sail, a single shadow, becomes one with the blue sky,
惟见长江天际流。	Till now I see only the river, on its way to heaven.
朝辞白帝彩云间，	From the walls of Baidi high in the colored dawn
千里江陵一日还。	To Jiangling by night-fall is three hundred miles,
两岸猿声啼不住，	Yet monkeys are still calling on both banks behind me
轻舟已过万重山。	To my boat these ten thousand mountains away.
故园东望路漫漫，	It's a long way home, a long way east.
双袖龙钟泪不乾。	I am old and my sleeve is wet with tears.
马上相逢无纸笔，	We meet on horseback. I have no means of writing.
凭君传语报平安。	Tell them three words: "He is safe."
岐王宅里寻常见，	I met you often when you were visiting princes
崔九堂前几度闻。	And when you were playing in noblemen's halls.
正是江南好风景，	Spring passes. Far down the river now,
落花时节又逢君。	I find you alone under falling petals.
独怜幽草涧边生，	Where tender grasses rim the stream
上有黄鹂深树鸣。	And deep boughs trill with mango-birds,
春潮带雨晚来急，	On the spring flood of last night's rain
野渡无人舟自横。	The ferry-boat moves as though someone were poling.
月落乌啼霜满天，	While I watch the moon go down, a crow caws through the frost;
江枫渔火对愁眠。	Under the shadows of maple-trees a fisherman moves with his torch;
姑苏城外寒山寺，	And I hear, from beyond Suzhou, from the temple on Cold Mountain,
夜半钟声到客船。	Ringing for me, here in my boat, the midnight bell.
春城无处不飞花，	Petals of spring fly all through the city
寒食东风御柳斜。	From the wind in the willows of the Imperial River.
日暮汉宫传蜡烛，	And at dusk, from the palace, candles are given out
轻烟散入五侯家。	To light first the mansions of the Five Great Lords.
更深月色半人家，	When the moon has colored half the house,
北斗阑干南斗斜。	With the North Star at its height and the South Star setting,
今夜偏知春气暖，	I can fed the first motions of the warm air of spring
虫声新透绿窗沙。	In the singing of an insect at my green-silk window.
纱窗日落渐黄昏，	With twilight passing her silken window,
金屋无人见泪痕。	She weeps alone in her chamber of gold
寂寞空庭春欲晚，	For spring is departing from a desolate garden,
梨花满地不开门。	And a drift of pear-petals is closing a door.
岁岁金河复玉关，	For years, to guard the Jade Pass and the River of Gold,
朝朝马策与刀环。	With our hands on our horse-whips and our sword hilts,
三春白雪归青冢，	We have watched the green graves change to snow
万里黄河绕黑山。	And the Yellow Stream ring the Black Mountain forever.
玉楼天半起笙歌，	High above, from a jade chamber, songs float half-way to heaven,
风送宫嫔笑语和。	The palace-girls' gay voices are mingled with the wind
月殿影开闻夜漏，	But now they are still, and you hear a water-clock drip in the Court of the Moon.
水晶帘卷近秋河。	They have opened the curtain wide, they are facing the River of Stars.
回乐峰前沙似雪，	The sand below the border-mountain lies like snow,
受降城外月如霜。	And the moon like frost beyond the city-wall,
不知何处吹芦管，	And someone somewhere, playing a flute,
一夜征人尽望乡。	Has made the soldiers homesick all night long.
朱雀桥边野草花，	Grass has run wild now by the Bridge of Red-Birds;
乌衣巷口夕阳斜。	And swallows' wings, at sunset, in Blacktail Row
旧时王谢堂前燕，	Where once they visited great homes,
飞入寻常百姓家。	Dip among doorways of the poor.
新妆宜面下朱楼，	In gala robes she comes down from her chamber
深锁春光一院愁。	Into her courtyard, enclosure of spring.
行到中庭数花朵，	When she tries from the centre to count the flowers,
蜻蜓飞上玉搔头。	On her hairpin of jade a dragon-fly poises.
泪湿罗巾梦不成，	Her tears are spent, but no dreams come.
夜深前殿按歌声。	She can hear the others singing through the night.
红颜未老恩先断，	She has lost his love. Alone with her beauty,
斜倚薰笼坐到明。	She leans till dawn on her incense-pillow.
禁门宫树月痕过，	When the moonlight, reaching a tree by the gate,
媚眼惟看宿鹭窠。	Shows her a quiet bird on its nest,
斜拔玉钗灯影畔，	She removes her jade hairpins and sits in the shadow
剔开红焰救飞蛾。	And puts out a flame where a moth was flying.
日光斜照集灵台，	The sun has gone slanting over a lordly roof
红树花迎晓露开。	And red-blossoming branches have leaned toward the dew
昨夜上皇新授箓，	Since the Emperor last night summoned a new favorite
太真含笑入帘来。	And Lady Yang's bright smile came through the curtains.
虢国夫人承主恩，	The Emperor has sent for Lady Guoguo.
平明骑马入宫门。	In the morning, riding toward the palace-gate,
却嫌脂粉污颜色，	Disdainful of the paint that might have marred her beauty,
淡扫蛾眉朝至尊。	To meet him she smooths her two moth-tiny eyebrows.
金陵津渡小山楼，	This one-story inn at Nanjing ferry
一宿行人自可愁。	Is a miserable lodging-place for the night
潮落夜江斜月里，	But across the dead moon's ebbing tide,
两三星火是瓜州。	Lights from Guazhou beckon on the river.
寂寂花时闭院门，	Now that the palace-gate has softly closed on its flowers,
美人相并立琼轩。	Ladies file out to their pavilion of jade,
含情欲说宫中事，	Abrim to the lips with imperial gossip
鹦鹉前头不敢言。	But not daring to breathe it with a parrot among them.
洞房昨夜停红烛，	Out go the great red wedding-chamber candles.
待晓堂前拜舅姑。	Tomorrow in state the bride faces your parents.
妆罢低声问夫婿，	She has finished preparing; she asks of you meekly
画眉深浅入时无。	Whether her eyebrows are painted in fashion.
清时有味是无能，	Even in this good reign, how can I serve?
闲爱孤云静爱僧。	The lone cloud rather, the Buddhist peace.
欲把一麾江海去，	Once more, before crossing river and sea,
乐游原上望昭陵。	I face the great Emperor's mountain-tomb.
折戟沈沙铁未销，	On a part of a spear still unrusted in the sand
自将磨洗认前朝。	I have burnished the symbol of an ancient kingdom.
东风不与周郎便，	Except for a wind aiding General Zhou Yu,
铜雀春深锁二乔。	Spring would have sealed both Qiao girls in CopperBird Palace.
烟笼寒水月笼沙，	Mist veils the cold stream, and moonlight the sand,
夜泊秦淮近酒家。	As I moor in the shadow of a river-tavern,
商女不知亡国恨，	Where girls, with no thought of a perished kingdom,
隔江犹唱后庭花。	Gaily echo A Song of Courtyard Flowers.
青山隐隐水迢迢，	There are faint green mountains and far green waters,
秋尽江南草未凋。	And grasses in this river region not yet faded by autumn;
二十四桥明月夜，	And clear in the moon on the Twenty-Four Bridges,
玉人何处教吹箫。	Girls white as jade are teaching flute-music.
落魄江湖载酒行，	With my wine-bottle, watching by river and lake
楚腰纤细掌中轻。	For a lady so tiny as to dance on my palm,
十年一觉扬州梦，	I awake, after dreaming ten years in Yangzhou,
赢得青楼薄幸名。	Known as fickle, even in the Street of Blue Houses.
银烛秋光冷画屏，	Her candle-light is silvery on her chill bright screen.
轻罗小扇扑流萤。	Her little silk fan is for fireflies.
天阶夜色凉如水，	She lies watching her staircase cold in the moon,
坐看牵牛织女星。	And two stars parted by the River of Heaven.
娉娉袅袅十三余，	She is slim and supple and not yet fourteen,
豆蔻梢头二月初。	The young spring-tip of a cardamon-spray.
春风十里扬州路，	On the Yangzhou Road for three miles in the breeze
卷上珠帘总不如。	Every pearl-screen is open. But there's no one like her.
多情却似总无情，	How can a deep love seem deep love,
唯觉樽前笑不成。	How can it smile, at a farewell feast?
蜡烛有心还惜别，	Even the candle, feeling our sadness,
替人垂泪到天明。	Weeps, as we do, all night long.
繁华事散逐香尘，	Stories of passion make sweet dust,
流水无情草自春。	Calm water, grasses unconcerned.
日暮东风怨啼鸟，	At sunset, when birds cry in the wind,
落花犹似坠楼人。	Petals are falling like a girl s robe long ago.
君问归期未有期，	You ask me when I am coming. I do not know.
巴山夜雨涨秋池。	I dream of your mountains and autumn pools brimming all night with the rain.
何当共剪西窗烛，	Oh, when shall we be trimming wicks again, together in your western window?
却话巴山夜雨时。	When shall I be hearing your voice again, all night in the rain?
嵩云秦树久离居，	I am far from the clouds of Sung Mountain, a long way from trees in Qin;
双鲤迢迢一纸笔。	And I send to you a message carried by two carp:
休问梁园旧宾客，	Absent this autumn from the Prince's garden,
茂陵秋雨病相如。	There's a poet at Maoling sick in the rain.
为有云屏无限娇，	There is only one Carved-Cloud, exquisite always-
凤城寒尽怕春宵。	Yet she dreads the spring, blowing cold in the palace,
无端嫁得金龟婿，	When her husband, a Knight of the Golden Tortoise,
辜负香衾事早朝。	Will leave her sweet bed, to be early at court.
乘兴南游不戒严，	When gaily the Emperor toured the south
九重谁省谏书函。	Contrary to every warning,
春风举国裁宫锦，	His whole empire cut brocades,
半作障泥半作帆。	Half for wheel-guards, half for sails.
瑶池阿母绮窗开，	The Mother of Heaven, in her window by the Jade Pool,
黄竹歌声动地哀。	Hears The Yellow Bamboo Song shaking the whole earth.
八骏日行三万里，	His eight horses running Ten thousand miles a day,
穆王何事不重来。	Why Emperor Wu never come back?
云母屏风烛影深，	Now that a candle-shadow stands on the screen of carven marble
长河渐落晓星沈。	And the River of Heaven slants and the morning stars are low,
嫦娥应悔偷灵药，	Are you sorry for having stolen the potion that has set you
碧海青天夜夜心。	Over purple seas and blue skies, to brood through the long nights?
宣室求贤访逐臣，	When the Emperor sought guidance from wise men, from exiles,
贾生才调更无伦。	He found no calmer wisdom than that of young Jia
可怜夜半虚前席，	And assigned him the foremost council-seat at midnight,
不问苍生问鬼神。	Yet asked him about gods, instead of about people.
冰簟银床梦不成，	A cool-matted silvery bed; but no dreams.
碧天如水夜云轻。	An evening sky as green as water, shadowed with tender clouds;
雁声远过潇湘去，	But far off over the southern rivers the calling of a wild-geese,
十二楼中月自明。	And here a twelve-story building, lonely under the moon.
玄宗回马杨妃死，	When the Emperor came back from his ride they had murdered Lady Yang
云雨难忘日月新。	That passion unforgettable through all the suns and moons
终是圣明天子事，	They had led him to forsake her by reminding him
景阳宫井又何人。	Of an emperor slain with his lady once, in a well at Jingyang Palace.
碧阑干外绣帘垂，	Her jade-green alcove curtained thick with silk,
猩色屏风画折枝。	Her vermilion screen with its pattern of flowers,
八尺龙须方锦褥，	Her eight-foot dragon-beard mat and her quilt brocaded in squares
已凉天气未寒时。	Are ready now for nights that are neither warm nor cold.
江雨霏霏江草齐，	Though a shower bends the river-grass, a bird is singing,
六朝如梦鸟空啼。	While ghosts of the Six Dynasties pass like a dream
无情最是台城柳，	Around the Forbidden City, under weeping willows
依旧烟笼十里堤。	Which loom still for three miles along the misty moat.
誓扫匈奴不顾身，	Thinking only of their vow that they would crush the Tartars- -
五千貂锦丧胡尘。	On the desert, clad in sable and silk, five thousand of them fell.
可怜无定河边骨，	But arisen from their crumbling bones on the banks of the river at the border,
犹是深闺梦里人。	Dreams of them enter, like men alive, into rooms where their loves lie sleeping.
别梦依依到谢家，	I go in a dream to the house of Xie
小廊回合曲阑斜。	Through a zigzag porch with arching rails
多情只有春庭月，	To a court where the spring moon lights for ever
犹为离人照落花。	Phantom flowers and a single figure.
尽寒食雨草萋萋，	As the holiday approaches, and grasses are bright after rain,
著麦苗风柳映堤。	And the causeway gleams with willows, and wheat-fields wave in the wind,
等是有家归未得，	We are thinking of our kinsfolk, far away from us.
杜鹃休向耳边啼。	O cuckoo, why do you follow us, why do you call us home?
渭城朝雨邑轻尘，	A morning-rain has settled the dust in Weicheng;
客舍青青柳色新。	Willows are green again in the tavern dooryard.
劝君更尽一杯酒，	Wait till we empty one more cup
西出阳关无故人。	West of Yang Gate there'll be no old friends.
桂魄初生秋露微，	Under the crescent moon a light autumn dew
轻罗已薄未更衣。	Has chilled the robe she will not change
银筝夜久殷勤弄，	And she touches a silver lute all night,
心怯空房不忍归。	Afraid to go back to her empty room.
奉帚平明金殿开，	She brings a broom at dawn to the Golden Palace doorway
且将团扇共徘徊。	And dusts the hall from end to end with her round fan,
玉颜不及寒鸦色，	And, for all her jade-whiteness, she envies a crow
犹带昭阳日影来。	Whose cold wings are kindled in the Court of the Bright Sun.
秦时明月汉时关，	The moon goes back to the time of Qin, the wall to the time of Han,
万里长征人未还。	And the road our troops are traveling goes back three hundred miles.
但使龙城飞将在，	Oh, for the Winged General at the Dragon City
不教胡马渡阴山。	That never a Tartar horseman might cross the Yin Mountains!
黄河远上白云间，	Where a yellow river climbs to the white clouds,
一片孤城万仞山。	Near the one city-wall among ten-thousand-foot mountains,
羌笛何须怨杨柳，	A Tartar under the willows is lamenting on his flute
春风不度玉门关。	That spring never blows to him through the Jade Pass
云想衣裳花想容，	Her robe is a cloud, her face a flower;
春风拂槛露华浓。	Her balcony, glimmering with the bright spring dew,
若非群玉山头见，	Is either the tip of earth's Jade Mountain
会向瑶台月下逢。	Or a moon- edged roof of paradise.
一枝红艳露凝香，	There's a perfume stealing moist from a shaft of red blossom,
云雨巫山枉断肠。	And a mist, through the heart, from the magical Hill of Wu- -
借问汉宫谁得似，	The palaces of China have never known such beauty-
可怜飞燕倚新妆。	Not even Flying Swallow with all her glittering garments.
名花倾国两相欢，	Lovely now together, his lady and his flowers
常得君王带笑看。	Lighten for ever the Emperor's eye,
解释春风无限恨，	As he listens to the sighing of the far spring wind
沈香亭北倚阑干。	Where she leans on a railing in the Aloe Pavilion.
劝君莫惜金缕衣，	Covet not a gold-threaded robe,
劝君惜取少年时。	Cherish only your young days!
花开堪折直须折，	If a bud open, gather it
莫待无花空折枝。	Lest you but wait for an empty bough.
